


10.1  EXPLICIT  AND  IMPLICIT  COSTS,  AND  ACCOUNTING  AND ECONOMIC  PROFIT



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Explain the difference between explicit costs and implicit costs

•    Understand the relationship between cost and revenue



rivate enterprise, the ownership of businesses by private individuals, is a hallmark of the U.S. economy. When people 
think of businesses, often giants like Wal-Mart, Microsoft, or General Motors come to mind. But firms come in all 
sizes, as shown in Table 1. The vast majority of American firms have fewer than 20 employees. As of 2010, the U.S. 
Census Bureau counted 5.7 mil- lion firms with employees in the U.S. economy. Slightly less than half of all the 
workers in private firms are at the 17,000 large firms, meaning they employ more than 500 workers. Another 35% of 
workers in the U.S. economy are at firms with fewer than 100 workers. These small-scale businesses include everything 
from dentists and lawyers to businesses that mow lawns or clean houses. Indeed, Table  1  does  not  include  a  
separate  category  for  the  millions  of  small  “non-employer”  businesses where a single owner or a few partners 
are not officially paid wages or a salary, but simply receive
whatever they can earn.

Number of Employees    Firms (% of total firms)    Number of Paid Employees (% of total employment) Total               
                      5,734,538                               112.0 million
0–9                                        4,543,315 (79.2%)                12.3 million (11.0%)
10–19                                   617,089 (10.8%)                   8.3 million (7.4%)
20–99                                   475,125 (8.3%)                      18.6 million (16.6%)
100–499                               81,773 (1.4%)                        15.9 million (14.2%)
500 or more                        17,236 (0.30%)                      50.9 million (49.8%)
Table 1. Range in Size of U.S. Firms. (Source: U.S. Census, 2010 www.census.gov)

Each of these businesses, regardless of size or complexity, tries to earn a profit:


Total revenue is the income brought into the firm from selling its products. It is calculated by multi- plying the 
price of the product times the quantity of output sold:

278                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 




We will see in the following chapters that revenue is a function of the demand for the firm’s products.

We can distinguish between two types of cost: explicit and implicit. Explicit costs are out-of-pocket costs, that is, 
payments that are actually made. Wages that a firm pays its employees or rent that a firm pays for its office are 
explicit costs. Implicit costs are more subtle, but just as important. They rep- resent the opportunity cost of using 
resources already owned by the firm. Often for small businesses, they are resources contributed by the owners; for 
example, working in the business while not get- ting a formal salary, or using the ground floor of a home as a retail 
store. Implicit costs also allow for depreciation of goods, materials, and equipment that are necessary for a company 
to operate. (See the Work it Out feature for an extended example.)

These two definitions of cost are important  for distinguishing between two conceptions of profit, accounting profit 
and economic profit. Accounting profit is a cash concept. It means total revenue minus  explicit  costs—the  difference 
 between  dollars  brought  in  and  dollars  paid  out.  Economic profit is total revenue minus total cost, including 
both explicit and implicit costs. The difference is important because even though a business pays income taxes based on 
its accounting profit, whether or not it is economically successful depends on its economic profit.


CALCULATING IMPLICIT COSTS

Consider the following example. Fred currently works for a corporate law firm. He is considering opening his own legal 
practice, where he expects to earn $200,000 per year once he gets established. To run his own firm, he would need an 
office and a law clerk. He has found the perfect office, which rents for $50,000 per year. A law clerk could be hired 
for $35,000 per year. If these figures are accurate, would Fred’s legal practice be profitable?
Step 1. First you have to calculate the costs. You can take what you know about explicit costs and total them:




Step 2. Subtracting the explicit costs from the revenue gives you the accounting profit.




But these calculations consider only the explicit costs. To open his own practice, Fred would have to quit his current 
job, where he is earning an annual salary of $125,000. This would be an implicit cost of opening his own firm.
Step 3. You need to subtract both the explicit and implicit costs to determine the true economic profit:






Fred would be losing $10,000 per year. That does not mean he would not want to open his own business, but it does mean 
he would be earning $10,000 less than if he worked for the corporate firm.
Implicit costs can include other things as well. Maybe Fred values his leisure time, and starting his own firm would 
require

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   279



him to put in more hours than at the corporate firm. In this case, the lost leisure would also be an implicit cost that 
would subtract from economic profits.

Now that we have an idea about the different types of costs, let’s look at cost structures. A firm’s cost structure in 
the long run may be different from that in the short run. We turn to that distinction in the next section.

KEY CONCEPTS AND SUMMARY

Privately owned firms are motivated to earn profits. Profit is the difference between revenues and costs. While 
accounting profit considers only explicit costs, economic profit considers both explicit and implicit costs.

SELF-CHECK QUESTIONS



1.    A firm had sales revenue of $1 million last year. It spent $600,000 on labor, $150,000 on capital and
$200,000 on materials. What was the firm’s accounting profit?
2.    Continuing from Self-Check Question 1, the firm’s factory sits on land owned by the firm that could be rented out 
for $30,000 per year. What was the firm’s economic profit last year?



REVIEW QUESTIONS



1.    What are explicit and implicit costs?
2.    Would an interest payment on a loan to a firm be considered an explicit or implicit cost?
3.    What is the difference between accounting and economic profit?




CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS



Small “Mom and Pop firms,” like inner city grocery stores, sometimes exist even though they do not earn economic 
profits. How can you explain this?



PROBLEMS



A firm is considering an investment that will earn a 6% rate of return. If it were to borrow the money, it would have 
to pay 8% interest on the loan, but it currently has the cash, so it will not need to borrow. Should the firm make the 
investment? Show your work.

280                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 

REFERENCES

2010 U.S. Census. www.census.gov.

GLOSSARY
accounting profit total revenues minus explicit costs, including depreciation
economic profit total revenues minus total costs (explicit plus implicit costs)
explicit costs out-of-pocket costs for a firm, for example, payments for wages and salaries, rent, or materials
firm an organization that combines inputs of labor, capital, land, and raw or finished component
materials to produce outputs.
implicit costs opportunity cost of resources already owned by the firm and used in business, for example, expanding a 
factory onto land already owned
private enterprise the ownership of businesses by private individuals
production the process of combining inputs to produce outputs, ideally of a value greater than the value of the inputs
revenue income from selling a firm’s product; defined as price times quantity sold

SOLUTIONS


Answers to Self-Cfteck Questions





1.





2.



10.2  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  COSTS  IN  THE  SHORT  RUN



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Analyze short-run costs as influenced by total cost, fixed cost, variable cost, marginal cost, and average cost.

•    Calculate average profit

•    Evaluate patterns of costs to determine potential profit



he cost of producing a firm’s output depends on how much labor and pftysical capital the firm uses.  A  list  of  the  
costs  involved  in  producing  cars  will  look  very  different  from  the  costs involved  in  producing  computer  
software  or  haircuts  or  fast-food  meals.  However,  the  cost structure of all firms can be broken down into some 
common underlying patterns. When a firm looks at its total costs of production in the short run, a useful starting 
point is to divide total costs into two categories: fixed costs that cannot be changed in the short run and variable 
costs that can be changed.

FIXED AND VARIABLE COSTS
Fixed costs are expenditures that do not change regardless of the level of production, at least not in the short term. 
Whether you produce a lot or a little, the fixed costs are the same. One example is the rent on a factory or a retail 
space. Once you sign the lease, the rent is the same regardless of how much you produce, at least until the lease runs 
out. Fixed costs can take many other forms: for example, the cost of machinery or equipment to produce the product, 
research and development costs to develop new products, even an expense like advertising to popularize a brand name. 
The level of fixed costs varies according to the specific line of business: for instance, manufacturing computer chips 
requires an expensive factory, but a local moving and hauling business can get by with almost no fixed costs at all if 
it rents trucks by the day when needed.

Variable costs, on the other hand, are incurred in the act of producing—the more you produce, the greater  the  
variable  cost.  Labor  is  treated  as  a  variable  cost,  since  producing  a  greater  quantity  of a  good  or  
service  typically  requires  more  workers  or  more  work  hours.  Variable  costs  would  also include raw 
materials.

As a concrete example of fixed and variable costs, consider the barber shop called “The Clip Joint” shown in Figure 1. 
The data for output and costs are shown in Table 2. The fixed costs of operating the barber shop, including the space 
and equipment, are $160 per day. The variable costs are the costs of hiring barbers, which in our example is $80 per 
barber each day. The first two columns of the table

282                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


show the quantity of haircuts the barbershop can produce as it hires additional barbers. The third column shows the 
fixed costs, which do not change regardless of the level of production. The fourth column shows the variable costs at 
each level of output. These are calculated by taking the amount of labor hired and multiplying by the wage. For 
example, two barbers cost: 2 × $80 = $160. Adding together the fixed costs in the third column and the variable costs 
in the fourth column produces the total costs in the fifth column. So, for example, with two barbers the total cost is: 
$160 + $160 = $320.

Labor    Quantity    Fixed Cost    Variable Cost    Total Cost
1             16                 $160               $80                       $240
2             40                 $160               $160                    $320
3             60                 $160               $240                    $400
4             72                 $160               $320                    $480
5             80                 $160               $400                    $560
6             84                 $160               $480                    $640
7             82                 $160               $560                    $720
Table 2. Output and Total Costs

















Figure 1. How Output Affects Total Costs. At zero production, the fixed costs of $160 are still present. As production 
increases, vari- able costs are added to fixed costs, and the total cost is the sum of the two.

The relationship between the quantity of output being produced and the cost of producing that output is shown 
graphically in the figure. The fixed costs are always shown as the vertical intercept of the total cost curve; that is, 
they are the costs incurred when output is zero so there are no variable costs.

You  can  see  from  the  graph  that  once  production  starts,  total  costs  and  variable  costs  rise.  While 
variable costs may initially increase at a decreasing rate, at some point they begin increasing at an increasing rate. 
This is caused by diminishing marginal returns, discussed in the chapter on Choice in a World of Scarcity, which is 
easiest to see with an example. As the number of barbers increases from zero to one in the table, output increases from 
0 to 16 for a marginal gain of 16; as the number rises from one to two barbers, output increases from 16 to 40, a 
marginal gain of 24. From that point on,

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   283

though, the marginal gain in output diminishes as each additional barber is added. For example, as the number of 
barbers rises from two to three, the marginal output gain is only 20; and as the number rises from three to four, the 
marginal gain is only 12.

To understand the reason behind this pattern, consider that a one-man barber shop is a very busy operation. The single 
barber needs to do everything: say hello to people entering, answer the phone, cut hair, sweep up, and run the cash 
register. A second barber reduces the level of disruption from jumping back and forth between these tasks, and allows a 
greater division of labor and specialization. The  result  can  be  greater  increasing  marginal  returns.  However,  
as  other  barbers  are  added,  the advantage of each additional barber is less, since the specialization of labor can 
only go so far. The addition of a sixth or seventh or eighth barber just to greet people at the door will have less 
impact than the second one did. This is the pattern of diminishing marginal returns. As a result, the total costs of 
production will begin to rise more rapidly as output increases. At some point, you may even see negative returns as the 
additional barbers begin bumping elbows and getting in each other’s way. In this case, the addition of still more 
barbers would actually cause output to decrease, as shown in the last row of Table 2.
This pattern of diminisfting marginal returns is common in production. As another example, con- sider the problem of 
irrigating a crop on a farmer’s field. The plot of land is the fixed factor of produc- tion, while the water that can 
be added to the land is the key variable cost. As the farmer adds water to the land, output increases. But adding more 
and more water brings smaller and smaller increases in output, until at some point the water floods the field and 
actually reduces output. Diminishing mar- ginal returns occur because, at a given level of fixed costs, each additional 
input contributes less and less to overall production.

AVERAGE TOTAL COST, AVERAGE VARIABLE COST, MARGINAL COST

The breakdown of total costs into fixed and variable costs can provide a basis for other insights as well. The first 
five columns of Table 3 duplicate the previous table, but the last three columns show average total costs, average 
variable costs, and marginal costs. These new measures analyze costs on a per-unit (rather than a total) basis and are 
reflected in the curves shown in Figure 2.

Labor    Quantity    Fixed Cost    Variable Cost    Total Cost    Marginal Cost    Average Total Cost    Average 
Variable Cost
1             16                 $160               $80                       $240              $5.00                   
  $15.00                           $5.00
2             40                 $160               $160                    $320              $3.30                     
$8.00                              $4.00
3             60                 $160               $240                    $400              $4.00                     
$6.60                              $4.00
4             72                 $160               $320                    $480              $6.60                     
$6.60                              $4.40
5             80                 $160               $400                    $560              $10.00                   
$7.00                              $5.00
6             84                 $160               $480                    $640              $20.00                   
$7.60                              $5.70
Table 3. Different Types of Costs

Average total cost (sometimes referred to simply as average cost) is total cost divided by the quantity of output. 
Since the total cost of producing 40 haircuts is $320, the average total cost for producing each of 40 haircuts is 
$320/40, or $8 per haircut. Average cost curves are typically U-shaped, as Figure 2 shows. Average total cost starts 
off relatively high, because at low levels of output total costs are dominated by the fixed cost; mathematically, the 
denominator is so small that average total cost is

284                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 





















Figure 2. Cost Curves at the Clip Joint. The information on  total  costs,  fixed  cost,  and  variable  cost  can  
also  be presented on a per-unit basis. Average total cost (ATC) is calculated by dividing total cost by the total 
quantity pro- duced. The average total cost curve is typically U-shaped. Average variable cost (AVC) is calculated by 
dividing vari- able cost by the quantity produced. The average variable cost  curve  lies  below  the  average  total  
cost  curve  and  is typically   U-shaped   or   upward-sloping.   Marginal   cost (MC)  is  calculated  by  taking  
the  change  in  total  cost between two levels of output and dividing by the change in output. The marginal cost curve 
is upward-sloping.

large. Average total cost then declines, as the fixed costs are spread over an increasing quantity of out- put. In the 
average cost calculation, the rise in the numerator of total costs is relatively small compared to the rise in the 
denominator of quantity produced. But as output expands still further, the average cost begins to rise. At the right 
side of the average cost curve, total costs begin rising more rapidly as diminishing returns kick in.
Average variable cost obtained when variable cost is divided by quantity of output. For example, the variable cost of 
producing 80 haircuts is $400, so the average variable cost is $400/80, or $5 per hair- cut. Note that at any level of 
output, the average variable cost curve will always lie below the curve for average total cost, as shown in Figure 2. 
The reason is that average total cost includes average variable cost and average fixed cost. Thus, for Q = 80 haircuts, 
the average total cost is $8 per haircut, while the average variable cost is $5 per haircut. However, as output grows, 
fixed costs become relatively less important (since they do not rise with output), so average variable cost sneaks 
closer to average cost.

Average  total  and  variable  costs  measure  the  average  costs  of  producing  some  quantity  of  output. Marginal 
cost is somewhat different. Marginal cost is the additional cost of producing one more unit of output. So it is not the 
cost per unit of all units being produced, but only the next one (or next few). Marginal cost can be calculated by 
taking the change in total cost and dividing it by the change in

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   285

quantity. For example, as quantity produced increases from 40 to 60 haircuts, total costs rise by 400 – 320, or 80. 
Thus, the marginal cost for each of those marginal 20 units will be 80/20, or $4 per haircut. The marginal cost curve 
is generally upward-sloping, because diminishing marginal returns implies that additional units are more costly to 
produce. A small range of increasing marginal returns can be seen in the figure as a dip in the marginal cost curve 
before it starts rising. There is a point at which marginal and average costs meet, as the following Clear it Up 
feature discusses.


WHERE DO MARGINAL AND AVERAGE COSTS MEET?

The marginal cost line intersects the average cost line exactly at the bottom of the average cost curve—which occurs at 
a quantity of 72 and cost of $6.60 in Figure 2. The reason why the intersection occurs at this point is built into the 
eco- nomic meaning of marginal and average costs. If the marginal cost of production is below the average cost for 
producing previous units, as it is for the points to the left of where MC crosses ATC, then producing one more 
additional unit will reduce average costs overall—and the ATC curve will be downward-sloping in this zone. Conversely, 
if the marginal cost of production for producing an additional unit is above the average cost for producing the earlier 
units, as it is for points to the right of where MC crosses ATC, then producing a marginal unit will increase average 
costs overall—and the ATC curve must be upward-sloping in this zone. The point of transition, between where MC is 
pulling ATC down and where it is pulling it up, must occur at the minimum point of the ATC curve.
This idea of the marginal cost “pulling down” the average cost or “pulling up” the average cost may sound abstract, but 
think about it in terms of your own grades. If the score on the most recent quiz you take is lower than your average 
score on previous quizzes, then the marginal quiz pulls down your average. If your score on the most recent quiz is 
higher than the average on previous quizzes, the marginal quiz pulls up your average. In this same way, low marginal 
costs of produc- tion first pull down average costs and then higher marginal costs pull them up.

The numerical calculations behind average cost, average variable cost, and marginal cost will change from firm to firm. 
However, the general patterns of these curves, and the relationships and economic intuition behind them, will not 
change.

LESSONS FROM ALTERNATIVE MEASURES OF COSTS

Breaking down total costs into fixed cost, marginal cost, average total cost, and average variable cost is useful 
because each statistic offers its own insights for the firm.

Whatever the firm’s quantity of production, total revenue must exceed total costs if it is to earn a profit. As 
explored in the chapter Choice in a World of Scarcity, fixed costs are often sunk costs that cannot be recouped. In 
thinking about what to do next, sunk costs should typically be ignored, since this spending has already been made and 
cannot be changed. However, variable costs can be changed, so they convey information about the firm’s ability to cut 
costs in the present and the extent to which costs will increase if production rises.


WHY ARE TOTAL COST AND AVERAGE COST NOT ON THE SAME GRAPH?

Total cost, fixed cost, and variable cost each reflect different aspects of the cost of production over the entire 
quantity of output being produced. These costs are measured in dollars. In contrast, marginal cost, average cost, and 
average variable cost are costs per unit. In the previous example, they are measured as cost per haircut. Thus, it 
would not make sense to put all of these numbers on the same graph, since they are measured in different units ($ 
versus $ per unit of output).

286                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 



It would be as if the vertical axis measured two different things. In addition, as a practical matter, if they were on 
the same graph, the lines for marginal cost, average cost, and average variable cost would appear almost flat against 
the horizontal axis, compared to the values for total cost, fixed cost, and variable cost. Using the figures from the 
previous example, the total cost of producing 40 haircuts is $320. But the average cost is $320/40, or $8. If you 
graphed both total and average cost on the same axes, the average cost would hardly show.

Average cost tells a firm whether it can earn profits given the current price in the market. If we divide profit by the 
quantity of output produced we get average profit, also known as the firm’s profit mar- gin. Expanding the equation for 
profit gives:









But note that:




Thus:


This is the firm’s profit margin. This definition implies that if the market price is above average cost, average 
profit, and thus total profit, will be positive; if price is below average cost, then profits will be negative.

The marginal cost of producing an additional unit can be compared with the marginal revenue gained by  selling  that  
additional  unit  to  reveal  whether  the  additional  unit  is  adding  to  total  profit—or not. Thus, marginal cost 
helps producers understand how profits would be affected by increasing or decreasing production.

A VARIETY OF COST PATTERNS

The pattern of costs varies among industries and even among firms in the same industry. Some busi- nesses  have  high  
fixed  costs,  but  low  marginal  costs.  Consider,  for  example,  an  Internet  company that provides medical advice 
to customers. Such a company might be paid by consumers directly, or perhaps hospitals or healthcare practices might 
subscribe on behalf of their patients. Setting up the website, collecting the information, writing the content, and 
buying or leasing the computer space to handle the web traffic are all fixed costs that must be undertaken before the 
site can work. However, when the website is up and running, it can provide a high quantity of service with relatively 
low vari- able costs, like the cost of monitoring the system and updating the information. In this case, the total cost 
curve might start at a high level, because of the high fixed costs, but then might appear close to flat, up to a large 
quantity of output, reflecting the low variable costs of operation. If the website is

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   287

popular, however, a large rise in the number of visitors will overwhelm the website, and increasing output further 
could require a purchase of additional computer space.

For other firms, fixed costs may be relatively low. For example, consider firms that rake leaves in the fall or shovel 
snow off sidewalks and driveways in the winter. For fixed costs, such firms may need little more than a car to 
transport workers to homes of customers and some rakes and shovels. Still other firms may find that diminishing 
marginal returns set in quite sharply. If a manufacturing plant tried to run 24 hours a day, seven days a week, little 
time remains for routine maintenance of the equipment, and marginal costs can increase dramatically as the firm 
struggles to repair and replace overworked equipment.

Every firm can gain insight into its task of earning profits by dividing its total costs into fixed and variable costs, 
and then using these calculations as a basis for average total cost, average variable cost, and marginal cost. However, 
making a final decision about the profit-maximizing quantity to produce and the price to charge will require combining 
these perspectives on cost with an analysis of sales and revenue, which in turn requires looking at the market 
structure in which the firm finds itself. Before we turn to the analysis of market structure in other chapters, we will 
analyze the firm’s cost structure from a long-run perspective.

KEY CONCEPTS AND SUMMARY

In a short-run perspective, a firm’s total costs can be divided into fixed costs, which a firm must incur before 
producing any output, and variable costs, which the firm incurs in the act of producing. Fixed costs are sunk costs; 
that is, because they are in the past and cannot be altered, they should play no role in economic decisions about 
future production or pricing. Variable costs typically show dimin- ishing marginal returns, so that the marginal cost 
of producing higher levels of output rises.

Marginal cost is calculated by taking the change in total cost (or the change in variable cost, which will be the same 
thing) and dividing it by the change in output, for each possible change in output. Mar- ginal costs are typically 
rising. A firm can compare marginal cost to the additional revenue it gains from selling another unit to find out 
whether its marginal unit is adding to profit.

Average total cost is calculated by taking total cost and dividing by total output at each different level of output. 
Average costs are typically U-shaped on a graph. If a firm’s average cost of production is lower than the market price, 
a firm will be earning profits.

Average variable cost is calculated by taking variable cost and dividing by the total output at each level of output. 
Average variable costs are typically U-shaped. If a firm’s average variable cost of production is lower than the market 
price, then the firm would be earning profits if fixed costs are left out of the picture.

SELF-CHECK QUESTIONS



1.    The WipeOut Ski Company manufactures skis for beginners. Fixed costs are $30. Fill in Table 4 for total cost, 
average variable cost, average total cost, and marginal cost.

288                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 




Quantity    Variable Cost    Fixed Cost    Total Cost    Average Total Cost    Average Variable Cost    Marginal Cost

0                   0                           $30

1                   $10                       $30

2                   $25                       $30

3                   $45                       $30

4                   $70                       $30

5                   $100                     $30

6                   $135                     $30
Table 4.

2.    Based on your answers to the WipeOut Ski Company in Self-Check Question 1, now imagine a situation where the firm 
produces a quantity of 5 units that it sells for a price of $25 each.

a.    What will be the company’s profits or losses?
b.    How can you tell at a glance whether the company is making or losing money at this price by looking at average 
cost?
c.    At the given quantity and price, is the marginal unit produced adding to profits?




REVIEW QUESTIONS



1.    What is the difference between fixed costs and variable costs?
2.    Are there fixed costs in the long-run? Explain briefly.
3.    Are fixed costs also sunk costs? Explain.
4.    What are diminishing marginal returns as they relate to costs?
5.    Which costs are measured on per-unit basis: fixed costs, average cost, average variable cost, variable costs, and 
marginal cost?
6.    How is each of the following calculated: marginal cost, average total cost, average variable cost?




CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS



1.    A common name for fixed cost is “overhead.” If you divide fixed cost by the quantity of output produced, you get 
average fixed cost. Supposed fixed cost is $1,000. What does the average fixed cost curve look like? Use your response 
to explain what “spreading the overhead” means.
2.    How does fixed cost affect marginal cost? Why is this relationship important?
3.    Average cost curves (except for average fixed cost) tend to be U-shaped, decreasing and then increasing. Marginal 
cost curves have the same shape, though this may be harder to see since most of the marginal cost curve is increasing. 
Why do you think that average and marginal cost curves have the same general shape?

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   289




PROBLEMS



1.    Return to Figure 1. What is the marginal gain in output from increasing the number of barbers from 4 to 5 and 
from 5 to 6? Does it continue the pattern of diminishing marginal returns?
2.    Compute the average total cost, average variable cost, and marginal cost of producing 60 and 72 haircuts. Draw 
the graph of the three curves between 60 and 72 haircuts.



GLOSSARY
average profit profit divided by the quantity of output produced; profit margin
average total cost total cost divided by the quantity of output
average variable cost variable cost divided by the quantity of output
fixed cost expenditure that must be made before production starts and that does not change regardless of the level of 
production
marginal cost the additional cost of producing one more unit
total cost the sum of fixed and variable costs of production
variable cost cost of production that increases with the quantity produced

EXERCISES


Answers to Self-Cfteck Questions

Quantity    Variable Cost    Fixed Cost    Total Cost    Average Total Cost    Average Variable Cost    Marginal Cost
1.
0                   0                           $30                  $30                 –                              
       –

1                   $10                       $30                  $40                 $10.00                           
$40.00                                  $10

2                   $25                       $30                  $55                 $12.50                           
$27.50                                  $15

3                   $45                       $30                  $75                 $15.00                           
$25.00                                  $20

4                   $70                       $30                  $100               $17.50                           
$25.00                                  $25

5                   $100                     $30                  $130               $20.00                           
$26.00                                  $30

6                   $135                     $30                  $165               $22.50                           
$27.50                                  $35
Table 5.

2.                a.    Total revenues in this example will be a quantity of five units multiplied by the price of 
$25/unit, which equals $125. Total costs when producing five units are $130. Thus, at this level of quantity and output 
the firm experiences losses (or negative profits) of $5.
b.    If price is less than average cost, the firm is not making a profit. At an output of five units, the average cost 
is $26/unit. Thus, at a glance you can see the firm is making losses. At a second glance, you can see that it must be 
losing $1 for each unit produced (that is, average cost of $26/ unit minus the price of $25/unit). With five units 
produced, this observation implies total losses of $5.
c.    When producing five units, marginal costs are $30/unit. Price is $25/unit. Thus, the marginal unit is not adding 
to profits, but is actually subtracting from profits, which suggests that the firm should reduce its quantity produced.
