


11.3  ENTRY  AND  EXIT  DECISIONS  IN  THE  LONG  RUN



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Explain how entry and exit lead to zero profits in the long run

•    Discuss the long-run adjustment process



he line between the short run and the long run cannot be defined precisely with a stopwatch, or even with a calendar. 
It varies according to the specific business. The distinction between the short run and the long run is therefore more 
technical: in the short run, firms cannot change
the usage of fixed inputs, while in the long run, the firm can adjust all factors of production.

In a competitive market, profits are a red cape that incites businesses to charge. If a business is making a profit in 
the short run, it has an incentive to expand existing factories or to build new ones. New firms  may  start  
production,  as  well.  When  new  firms  enter  the  industry  in  response  to  increased industry profits it is 
called entry.

Losses are the black thundercloud that causes businesses to flee. If a business is making losses in the short run, it 
will either keep limping along or just shut down, depending on whether its revenues are covering its variable costs. 
But in the long run, firms that are facing losses will shut down at least some of their output, and some firms will 
cease production altogether. The long-run process of reducing production in response to a sustained pattern of losses 
is called exit. The following Clear It Up fea- ture discusses where some of these losses might come from, and the 
reasons why some firms go out of business.


WHY DO FIRMS CEASE TO EXIST?

Can we say anything about what causes a firm to exit an industry? Profits are the measurement that determines whether a 
business stays operating or not. Individuals start businesses with the purpose of making profits. They invest their 
money, time, effort, and many other resources to produce and sell something that they hope will give them something in 
return. Unfortunately, not all businesses are successful, and many new startups soon realize that their “business 
adventure” must eventually end.
In the model of perfectly competitive firms, those that consistently cannot make money will “exit,” which is a nice, 
bloodless word for a more painful process. When a business fails, after all, workers lose their jobs, investors lose 
their money, and owners and managers can lose their dreams. Many businesses fail. The U.S. Small Business 
Administration indicates that in 2011, 409,040 new firms “entered,” and 470,376 firms failed.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   329



Sometimes  a business  fails  because  of poor management  or workers who are not very productive, or because  of tough 
domestic or foreign competition. Businesses also fail from a variety of causes that might best be summarized as bad 
luck. For example, conditions of demand and supply in the market shift in an unexpected way, so that the prices that 
can be charged for outputs fall or the prices that need to be paid for inputs rise. With millions of businesses in the 
U.S. economy, even a small fraction of them failing will affect many people—and business failures can be very hard on 
the workers and managers directly involved. But from the standpoint of the overall economic system, business exits are 
sometimes a neces- sary evil if a market-oriented system is going to offer a flexible mechanism for satisfying 
customers, keeping costs low, and inventing new products.


HOW ENTRY AND EXIT LEAD TO ZERO PROFITS IN THE LONG RUN
No perfectly competitive firm acting alone can affect the market price. However, the combination of many firms entering 
or exiting the market will affect overall supply in the market. In turn, a shift in supply for the market as a whole 
will affect the market price. Entry and exit to and from the market are the driving forces behind a process that, in 
the long run, pushes the price down to minimum aver- age total costs so that all firms are earning a zero profit.

To understand how short-run profits for a perfectly competitive firm will evaporate in the long run, imagine the 
following situation. The market is in long-run equilibrium, where all firms earn zero economic profits producing the 
output level where P = MR = MC and P = AC. No firm has the incen- tive to enter or leave the market. Let’s say that the 
product’s demand increases, and with that, the mar- ket price goes up. The existing firms in the industry are now 
facing a higher price than before, so they will increase production to the new output level where P = MR = MC.

This  will  temporarily  make  the  market  price  rise  above  the  average  cost  curve,  and  therefore,  the 
existing firms in the market will now be earning economic profits. However, these economic profits attract other firms 
to enter the market. Entry of many new firms causes the market supply curve to shift to the right. As the supply curve 
shifts to the right, the market price starts decreasing, and with that, economic profits fall for new and existing 
firms. As long as there are still profits in the market, entry will continue to shift supply to the right. This will 
stop whenever the market price is driven down to the zero-profit level, where no firm is earning economic profits.

Short-run losses will fade away by reversing this process. Say that the market is in long-run equilib- rium. This time, 
instead, demand decreases, and with that, the market price starts falling. The existing firms in the industry are now 
facing a lower price than before, and as it will be below the average cost curve, they will now be making economic 
losses. Some firms will continue producing where the new P = MR = MC, as long as they are able to cover their average 
variable costs. Some firms will have to shut down immediately as they will not be able to cover their average variable 
costs, and will then only incur their fixed costs, minimizing their losses. Exit of many firms causes the market supply 
curve to shift to the left. As the supply curve shifts to the left, the market price starts rising, and eco- nomic 
losses start to be lower. This process ends whenever the market price rises to the zero-profit level, where the 
existing firms are no longer losing money and are at zero profits again. Thus, while a perfectly competitive firm can 
earn profits in the short run, in the long run the process of entry will push down prices until they reach the 
zero-profit level. Conversely, while a perfectly competitive firm may earn losses in the short run, firms will not 
continually lose money. In the long run, firms mak- ing losses are able to escape from their fixed costs, and their 
exit from the market will push the price back up to the zero-profit level. In the long run, this process of entry and 
exit will drive the price in

330                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


perfectly competitive markets to the zero-profit point at the bottom of the AC curve, where marginal cost crosses 
average cost.

THE LONG-RUN ADJUSTMENT AND INDUSTRY TYPES

Whenever there are expansions in an industry, costs of production for the existing and new firms could either stay the 
same, increase, or even decrease. Therefore, we can categorize an industry as being (1) a constant cost industry  (as 
demand increases,  the cost of production for firms stays the same), (2) an increasing cost industry (as demand 
increases, the cost of production for firms increases), or (3) a decreasing cost industry (as demand increases the 
costs of production for the firms decreases).
For a constant cost industry, whenever there is an increase in market demand and price, then the supply curve shifts to 
the right with new firms’ entry and stops at the point where the new long-run equilibrium intersects at the same market 
price as before. But why will costs remain the same? In this type of industry, the supply curve is very elastic. Firms 
can easily supply any quantity that consumers demand.  In  addition,  there  is  a  perfectly  elastic  supply  of  
inputs—firms  can  easily  increase  their demand for employees, for example, with no increase to wages. Tying in to 
our Bring it Home dis- cussion, an increased demand for ethanol in recent years has caused the demand for corn to 
increase. Consequently, many farmers switched from growing wheat to growing corn. Agricultural markets are generally 
good examples of constant cost industries.

For an increasing cost industry, as the market expands, the old and new firms experience increases in their costs of 
production, which makes the new zero-profit level intersect at a higher price than before. Here companies may have to 
deal with limited inputs, such as skilled labor. As the demand for these workers rise, wages rise and this increases 
the cost of production for all firms. The industry supply curve in this type of industry is more inelastic.

For a decreasing cost industry, as the market expands, the old and new firms experience lower costs of production, 
which makes the new zero-profit level intersect at a lower price than before. In this case, the industry and all the 
firms in it are experiencing falling average total costs. This can be due to an improvement in technology in the entire 
industry or an increase in the education of employees. High tech industries may be a good example of a decreasing cost 
market.

Figure 1 (a) presents the case of an adjustment process in a constant cost industry. Whenever there are output 
expansions in this type of industry, the long-run outcome implies more output produced at exactly the same original 
price. Note that supply was able to increase to meet the increased demand. When we join the before and after long-run 
equilibriums, the resulting line is the long run supply (LRS) curve in perfectly competitive markets. In this case, it 
is a flat curve. Figure 1 (b) and Figure 1 (c) present the cases for an increasing cost and decreasing cost industry, 
respectively. For an increasing cost industry, the LRS is upward sloping, while for a decreasing cost industry, the LRS 
is downward sloping.

KEY CONCEPTS AND SUMMARY

In the long run, firms will respond to profits through a process of entry, where existing firms expand output and new 
firms enter the market. Conversely, firms will react to losses in the long run through a process of exit, in which 
existing firms reduce output or cease production altogether. Through the process of entry in response to profits and 
exit in response to losses, the price level in a perfectly com-

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   331















Figure 1. Adjustment Process in a Constant-Cost Industry. In (a), demand increased and supply met it. Notice that the 
supply increase is equal to the demand increase. The result is that the equilibrium price stays the same as quantity 
sold increases. In (b), notice that sellers were not able to increase supply as much as demand. Some inputs were 
scarce, or wages were rising. The equilibrium price rises. In (c), sellers easily increased supply in response to the 
demand increase. Here, new technology or economies of scale caused the large increase in supply, resulting in declining 
equilibrium price.

petitive market will move toward the zero-profit point, where the marginal cost curve crosses the AC curve, at the 
minimum of the average cost curve.

The long-run supply curve shows the long-run output supplied by firms in three different types of industries: constant 
cost, increasing cost, and decreasing cost.

SELF-CHECK QUESTIONS



1.    If new technology in a perfectly competitive market brings about a substantial reduction in costs of production, 
how will this affect the market?
2.    A market in perfect competition is in long-run equilibrium. What happens to the market if labor unions are able 
to increase wages for workers?



REVIEW QUESTIONS



1.    Why does entry occur?
2.    Why does exit occur?
3.    Do entry and exit occur in the short run, the long run, both, or neither?
4.    What price will a perfectly competitive firm end up charging in the long run? Why?

332                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 



CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS



1.    Many firms in the United States file for bankruptcy every year, yet they still continue operating. Why would they 
do this instead of completely shutting down?
2.    Why will profits for firms in a perfectly competitive industry tend to vanish in the long run?
3.    Why will losses for firms in a perfectly competitive industry tend to vanish in the long run?



GLOSSARY
entry the long-run process of firms entering an industry in response to industry profits
exit the long-run process of firms reducing production and shutting down in response to industry losses
long-run equilibrium where all firms earn zero economic profits producing the output level where
P = MR = MC and P = AC

SOLUTIONS


Answers to Self-Cfteck Questions

1.    With a technological improvement that brings about a reduction in costs of production, an adjustment process will 
take place in the market. The technological improvement will result in an increase in supply curves, by individual 
firms and at the market level. The existing firms will experience higher profits for a while, which will attract other 
firms into the market. This entry process will stop whenever the market supply increases enough (both by existing and 
new firms) so profits are driven back to zero.
2.    When wages increase, costs of production increase. Some firms would now be making economic losses and would shut 
down. The supply curve then starts shifting to the left, pushing the market price up. This process ends when all firms 
remaining in the market earn zero economic profits. The result is a contraction in the output produced in the market.



11.4  EFFICIENCY  IN  PERFECTLY  COMPETITIVE  MARKETS



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Apply concepts of productive efficiency and allocative efficiency to perfectly competitive markets

•    Compare the model of perfect competition to real-world markets



hen profit-maximizing firms in perfectly competitive markets combine with utility-maxi- mizing  consumers,  something  
remarkable  happens:  the  resulting  quantities  of  outputs  of goods and services demonstrate both productive and 
allocative efficiency (terms that were
first introduced in (Choice in a World of Scarcity) .

Productive efficiency means producing without waste, so that the choice is on the production possi- bility frontier. In 
the long run in a perfectly competitive market, because of the process of entry and exit, the price in the market is 
equal to the minimum of the long-run average cost curve. In other words, goods are being produced and sold at the 
lowest possible average cost.

Allocative efficiency means that among the points on the production possibility frontier, the point that is chosen is 
socially preferred—at least in a particular and specific sense. In a perfectly competi- tive market, price will be 
equal to the marginal cost of production. Think about the price that is paid for a good as a measure of the social 
benefit received for that good; after all, willingness to pay con- veys what the good is worth to a buyer. Then think 
about the marginal cost of producing the good as representing not just the cost for the firm, but more broadly as the 
social cost of producing that good. When perfectly competitive firms follow the rule that profits are maximized by 
producing at the quantity where price is equal to marginal cost, they are thus ensuring that the social benefits 
received from producing a good are in line with the social costs of production.
To explore what is meant by allocative efficiency, it is useful to walk through an example. Begin by assuming that the 
market for wholesale flowers is perfectly competitive, and so P = MC. Now, con- sider what it would mean if firms in 
that market produced a lesser quantity of flowers. At a lesser quantity, marginal costs will not yet have increased as 
much, so that price will exceed marginal cost; that is, P > MC. In that situation, the benefit to society as a whole of 
producing additional goods, as measured by the willingness of consumers to pay for marginal units of a good, would be 
higher than the cost of the inputs of labor and physical capital needed to produce the marginal good. In other words, 
the gains to society as a whole from producing additional marginal units will be greater than the costs.

334                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


Conversely, consider what it would mean if, compared to the level of output at the allocatively effi- cient choice when 
P = MC, firms produced a greater quantity of flowers. At a greater quantity, mar- ginal  costs  of  production  will  
have  increased  so  that  P  <  MC.  In  that  case,  the  marginal  costs  of producing additional flowers is greater 
than the benefit to society as measured by what people are willing to pay. For society as a whole, since the costs are 
outstripping the benefits, it will make sense to produce a lower quantity of such goods.

When perfectly competitive firms maximize their profits by producing the quantity where P = MC, they also assure that 
the benefits to consumers of what they are buying, as measured by the price they are willing to pay, is equal to the 
costs to society of producing the marginal units, as measured by the marginal costs the firm must pay—and thus that 
allocative efficiency holds.

The statements that a perfectly competitive market in the long run will feature both productive and allocative 
efficiency do need to be taken with a few grains of salt. Remember, economists are using the concept of “efficiency” in 
a particular and specific sense, not as a synonym for “desirable in every way.” For one thing, consumers’ ability to 
pay reflects the income distribution in a particular society. Thus, a homeless person may have no ability to pay for 
housing because they have insufficient income.

Perfect  competition,  in  the  long  run,  is  a  hypothetical  benchmark.  For  market  structures  such  as 
monopoly, monopolistic competition, and oligopoly, which are more frequently observed in the real world than perfect 
competition, firms will not always produce at the minimum of average cost, nor will they always set price equal to 
marginal cost. Thus, these other competitive situations will not pro- duce productive and allocative efficiency.

Moreover, real-world markets include many issues that are assumed away in the model of perfect competition, including 
pollution, inventions of new technology, poverty which may make some peo- ple unable to pay for basic necessities of 
life, government programs like national defense or education, discrimination in labor markets, and buyers and sellers 
who must deal with imperfect and unclear information. These issues are explored in other chapters. However, the 
theoretical efficiency of per- fect competition does provide a useful benchmark for comparing the issues that arise 
from these real- world problems.


A DIME A DOZEN

A quick glance at Table 14 reveals the dramatic increase in North Dakota corn production—more than double. Taking into 
consideration that corn typically yields two to three times as many bushels per acre as wheat, it is obvious there has 
been a significant increase in bushels of corn. Why the increase in corn acreage? Converging prices.

Year      Corn (millions of acres)       Wfteat (millions of acres)

2014     91.6                                             56.82
Table 14. (Source: USDA National Agricultural Statistics Service)

Historically, wheat prices have been higher than corn prices, offsetting wheat’s lower yield per acre. However, in 
recent years wheat and corn prices have been converging. In April 2013, Agweek reported the gap was just 71 cents per 
bushel. As the difference in price narrowed, switching to the production of higher yield per acre of corn simply made 
good business sense. Erik Younggren, president of the National Association of Wheat Growers said in the Agweek article, 
“I don’t think we’re going to see mile after mile of waving amber fields [of wheat] anymore.” (Until wheat prices rise, 
we will probably be seeing field after field of tasseled corn.)

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   335

KEY CONCEPTS AND SUMMARY

Long-run equilibrium in perfectly competitive markets meets two important conditions: allocative efficiency  and  
productive  efficiency.  These  two  conditions  have  important  implications.  First, resources are allocated to 
their best alternative use. Second, they provide the maximum satisfaction attainable by society.

SELF-CHECK QUESTIONS



1.    Productive efficiency and allocative efficiency are two concepts achieved in the long run in a perfectly 
competitive market. These are the two reasons why we call them “perfect.” How would you use these two concepts to 
analyze other market structures and label them “imperfect?”
2.    Explain how the profit-maximizing rule of setting P = MC leads a perfectly competitive market to be allocatively 
efficient.



REVIEW QUESTIONS



1.    Will a perfectly competitive market display productive efficiency? Why or why not?
2.    Will a perfectly competitive market display allocative efficiency? Why or why not?




CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS



1.    Assuming that the market for cigarettes is in perfect competition, what does allocative and productive efficiency 
imply in this case? What does it not imply?
2.    In the argument for why perfect competition is allocatively efficient, the price that people are willing to pay 
represents the gains to society and the marginal cost to the firm represents the costs to society. Can you think of 
some social costs or issues that are not included in the marginal cost to the firm? Or some social gains that are not 
included in what people pay for a good?



REFERENCES

Index Mundi. n.d. “Wheat Monthly Price—U.S. Dollars per Metric Ton.” Accessed March 11, 2015. 
http://www.indexmundi.com/commodities/?commodity=wheat.

Knutson, J. “Wheat on the Defensive in the Northern Plains.” Agweek, Associated Press State Wire: North Dakota (ND). 
April 14, 2013.

SBA Office of Advocacy. 2014. “Frequently Asked Questions: Advocacy: the voice of small business in   government.”   
Accessed   March   11,   2015.   https://www.sba.gov/sites/default/files/advocacy/ FAQ_March_2014_0.pdf.

336                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 



SOLUTIONS


Answers to Self-Cfteck Questions

1.    Perfect competition is considered to be “perfect” because both allocative and productive efficiency are met at 
the same time in a long-run equilibrium. If a market structure results in long-run equilibrium that does not minimize 
average total costs and/or does not charge a price equal to marginal cost, then either allocative or productive (or 
both) efficiencies are not met, and therefore the market cannot be labeled “perfect.”
2.    Think of the market price as representing the gain to society from a purchase, since it represents what someone 
is willing to pay. Think of the marginal cost as representing the cost to society from making the last unit of a good. 
If P > MC, then the benefits from producing more of a good exceed the costs, and society would gain from producing more 
of the good. If P < MC, then the social costs of producing the marginal good exceed the social benefits, and society 
should produce less of the good. Only if P = MC, the rule applied by a profit-maximizing perfectly competitive firm, 
will society’s costs and benefits be in balance. This choice will be the option that brings the greatest overall 
benefit to society.
