


12.2  HOW  A  PROFIT-MAXIMIZING  MONOPOLY  CHOOSES OUTPUT  AND  PRICE



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Explain the perceived demand curve for a perfect competitor and a monopoly

•    Analyze a demand curve for a monopoly and determine the output that maximizes profit and revenue

•    Calculate marginal revenue and marginal cost

•    Explain allocative efficiency as it pertains to the efficiency of a monopoly



onsider a monopoly firm, comfortably surrounded by barriers to entry so that it need not fear competition  from  other  
producers.  How  will  this  monopoly  choose  its  profit-maximizing quantity of output, and what price will it 
charge? Profits for the monopolist, like any firm, will
be equal to total revenues minus total costs. The pattern of costs for the monopoly can be analyzed within the same 
framework as the costs of a perfectly competitive firm—that is, by using total cost, fixed cost, variable cost, 
marginal cost, average cost, and average variable cost. However, because a monopoly faces no competition, its situation 
and its decision process will differ from that of a per- fectly competitive firm. (The Clear it Up feature discusses 
how hard it is sometimes to define “market” in a monopoly situation.)

DEMAND CURVES PERCEIVED BY A PERFECTLY COMPETITIVE FIRM AND BY A MONOPOLY

A perfectly competitive firm acts as a price taker, so its calculation of total revenue is made by taking the given 
market price and multiplying it by the quantity of output that the firm chooses. The demand curve as it is perceived by 
a perfectly competitive firm appears in Figure 1 (a). The flat perceived demand curve means that, from the viewpoint of 
the perfectly competitive firm, it could sell either a relatively low quantity like Ql or a relatively high quantity 
like Qh at the market price P.


WHAT DEFINES THE MARKET?

A monopoly is a firm that sells all or nearly all of the goods and services in a given market. But what defines the 
“market”? In a famous 1947 case, the federal government accused the DuPont company of having a monopoly in the 
cellophane mar- ket, pointing out that DuPont produced 75% of the cellophane in the United States. DuPont countered 
that even though it had a 75% market share in cellophane, it had less than a 20% share of the “flexible packaging 
materials,” which includes

350                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 





















Figure 1. The Perceived Demand Curve for a Perfect Competitor and a Monopolist. (a) A perfectly competitive firm 
perceives the demand curve that it faces to be flat. The flat shape means that the firm can sell either a low quantity 
(Ql) or a high quantity (Qh) at exactly the same price (P). (b) A monopolist perceives the demand curve that it faces 
to be the same as the market demand curve, which for most goods is downward-sloping. Thus, if the monopolist chooses a 
high level of output (Qh), it can charge only a relatively low price (Pl); conversely, if the monopolist chooses a low 
level of output (Ql), it can then charge a higher price (Ph). The challenge for the monopolist is to choose the 
combination of price and quantity that maximizes profits.

all other moisture-proof papers, films, and foils. In 1956, after years of legal appeals, the U.S. Supreme Court held 
that the broader market definition was more appropriate, and the case against DuPont was dismissed.
Questions over how to define the market continue today. True, Microsoft in the 1990s had a dominant share of the soft- 
ware for computer operating systems, but in the total market for all computer software and services, including 
everything from games to scientific programs, the Microsoft share was only about 14% in 2014. The Greyhound bus company 
may have a near-monopoly on the market for intercity bus transportation, but it is only a small share of the market for 
intercity transportation if that market includes private cars, airplanes, and railroad service. DeBeers has a monopoly 
in diamonds, but it is a much smaller share of the total market for precious gemstones and an even smaller share of the 
total market for jewelry. A small town in the country may have only one gas station: is this gas station a “monopoly,” 
or does it compete with gas stations that might be five, 10, or 50 miles away?
In general, if a firm produces a product without close substitutes, then the firm can be considered a monopoly producer 
in a single market. But if buyers have a range of similar—even if not identical—options available from other firms, 
then the firm is not a monopoly. Still, arguments over whether substitutes are close or not close can be controversial.

While  a  monopolist  can  charge  any  price  for  its  product,  that  price  is  nonetheless  constrained  by demand 
for the firm’s product. No monopolist, even one that is thoroughly protected by high barriers to entry, can require 
consumers to purchase its product. Because the monopolist is the only firm in the market, its demand curve is the same 
as the market demand curve, which is, unlike that for a per- fectly competitive firm, downward-sloping.

Figure 1 illustrates this situation. The monopolist can either choose a point like R with a low price (Pl) and high 
quantity (Qh), or a point like S with a high price (Ph) and a low quantity (Ql), or some intermediate point. Setting 
the price too high will result in a low quantity sold, and will not bring in

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   351

much revenue. Conversely, setting the price too low may result in a high quantity sold, but because of the low price, 
it will not bring in much revenue either. The challenge for the monopolist is to strike a profit-maximizing balance 
between the price it charges and the quantity that it sells. But why isn’t the perfectly competitive firm’s demand 
curve also the market demand curve? See the following Clear it Up feature for the answer to this question.


WHAT IS THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN PERCEIVED DEMAND AND MARKET DEMAND?

The demand curve as perceived by a perfectly competitive firm is not the overall market demand curve for that product. 
However, the firm’s demand curve as perceived by a monopoly is the same as the market demand curve. The reason for the 
difference is that each perfectly competitive firm perceives the demand for its products in a market that includes many 
other firms; in effect, the demand curve perceived by a perfectly competitive firm is a tiny slice of the entire market 
demand curve. In contrast, a monopoly perceives demand for its product in a market where the monopoly is the only 
producer.


TOTAL COST AND TOTAL REVENUE FOR A MONOPOLIST

Profits for a monopolist can be illustrated with a graph of total revenues and total costs, as shown with the example 
of the hypothetical HealthPill firm in Figure 2. The total cost curve has its typical shape; that is, total costs rise 
and the curve grows steeper as output increases.




















Figure 2. Total Revenue and Total Cost for the HealthPill Monopoly. Total revenue for the monopoly firm called 
HealthPill first rises, then falls. Low levels of output bring in relatively little total revenue, because the quantity 
is low. High levels of output bring in relatively less revenue, because the high quantity pushes down the market price. 
The total cost curve is upward-sloping. Profits will be high- est at the quantity of output where total revenue is most 
above total cost. Of the choices in Table 2, the highest profits happen at an output of 4. The profit-maximizing level 
of output is not the same as the revenue-maximizing level of output, which should make sense, because profits take 
costs into account and revenues do not.

352                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


Quantity    Total Cost    Quantity    Price    Total Revenue    Profit = Total Revenue – Total Cost
1                   1,500             1                   1,200    1,200                        300
2                   1,800             2                   1,100    2,200                     400
3                   2,200             3                   1,000    3,000                     800
4                   2,800             4                   900       3,600                     800
5                   3,500             5                   800       4,000                     500
6                   4,200             6                   700       4,200                     0
7                   5,600             7                   600       4,200                     –1,400
8                   7,400             8                   500       4,000                     –3,400
Table 2. Total Costs and Total Revenues of HealthPill

To calculate total revenue for a monopolist, start with the demand curve perceived by the monopolist. Table 2 shows 
quantities along the demand curve and the price at each quantity demanded, and then calculates total revenue by 
multiplying price times quantity at each level of output. (In this example, the output is given as 1, 2, 3, 4, and so 
on, for the sake of simplicity. If you prefer a dash of greater real- ism, you can imagine that these output levels and 
the corresponding prices are measured per 1,000 or 10,000 pills.) As the figure illustrates, total revenue for a 
monopolist rises, flattens out, and then falls. In this example, total revenue is highest at a quantity of 6 or 7.

Clearly, the total revenue for a monopolist is not a straight upward-sloping line, in the way that total revenue was 
for a perfectly competitive firm. The different total revenue pattern for a monopolist occurs because the quantity that 
a monopolist chooses to produce affects the market price, which was not true for a perfectly competitive firm. If the 
monopolist charges a very high price, then quantity demanded drops, and so total revenue is very low. If the monopolist 
charges a very low price, then, even if quantity demanded is very high, total revenue will not add up to much. At some 
intermediate level, total revenue will be highest.

However, the monopolist is not seeking to maximize revenue, but instead to earn the highest possible profit. Profits 
are calculated in the final row of the table. In the HealthPill example in Figure 2, the highest profit will occur at 
the quantity where total revenue is the farthest above total cost. Of the choices given in the table, the highest 
profits occur at an output of 4, where profit is 800.

MARGINAL REVENUE AND MARGINAL COST FOR A MONOPOLIST

In the real world, a monopolist often does not have enough information to analyze its entire total revenues or total 
costs curves; after all, the firm does not know exactly what would happen if it were to alter production dramatically. 
But a monopolist often has fairly reliable information about how changing output by small or moderate amounts will 
affect its marginal revenues and marginal costs, because it has had experience with such changes over time and because 
modest changes are easier to extrapolate from current experience. A monopolist can use information on marginal revenue 
and marginal cost to seek out the profit-maximizing combination of quantity and price.

The first four columns of Table 3 use the numbers on total cost from the HealthPill example in the previous exhibit and 
calculate marginal cost and average cost. This monopoly faces a typical upward- sloping marginal cost curve, as shown 
in Figure 3. The second four columns of Table 3 use the total revenue information from the previous exhibit and 
calculate marginal revenue.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   353
Notice that marginal revenue is zero at a quantity of 7, and turns negative at quantities higher than
7. It may seem counterintuitive that marginal revenue could ever be zero or negative: after all, does an  increase  in  
quantity  sold  not  always  mean  more  revenue?  For  a  perfect  competitor,  each  addi- tional unit sold brought a 
positive marginal revenue, because marginal revenue was equal to the given market price. But a monopolist can sell a 
larger quantity and see a decline in total revenue. When a monopolist increases sales by one unit, it gains some 
marginal revenue from selling that extra unit, but also loses some marginal revenue because every other unit must now 
be sold at a lower price. As the quantity sold becomes higher, the drop in price affects a greater quantity of sales, 
eventually caus- ing a situation where more sales cause marginal revenue to be negative.























Figure 3. Marginal Revenue and Marginal Cost for the HealthPill Monopoly. For a monopoly like HealthPill,  marginal  
revenue  decreases  as  additional  units  are  sold.  The  marginal  cost  curve  is upward-sloping. The 
profit-maximizing choice for the monopoly will be to produce at the quantity where marginal revenue is equal to 
marginal cost: that is, MR = MC. If the monopoly produces a lower quantity, then MR > MC at those levels of output, and 
the firm can make higher profits by expanding output. If the firm produces at a greater quantity, then MC > MR, and the 
firm can make higher profits by reducing its quantity of output.

354                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


Cost Information                                                                       Revenue Information
Quantity    Total Cost    Marginal Cost    Average Cost    Quantity    Price    Total Revenue    Marginal Revenue
1                   1,500             1,500                     1,500                   1                   1,200    
1,200                     1,200
2                   1,800             300                        900                      2                   1,100    
2,200                     1,000
3                   2,200             400                        733                      3                   1,000    
3,000                     800
4                   2,800             600                        700                      4                   900       
3,600                     600
5                   3,500             700                        700                      5                   800       
4,000                     400
6                   4,200             700                        700                      6                   700       
4,200                     200
7                   5,600             1,400                     800                      7                   600       
4,200                     0
8                   7,400             1,800                     925                      8                   500       
4,000                     –200
Table 3. Costs and Revenues of HealthPill

A monopolist can determine its profit-maximizing price and quantity by analyzing the marginal rev- enue and marginal 
costs of producing an extra unit. If the marginal revenue exceeds the marginal cost, then the firm should produce the 
extra unit.

For example, at an output of 3 in Figure 3, marginal revenue is 800 and marginal cost is 400, so pro- ducing this unit 
will clearly add to overall profits. At an output of 4, marginal revenue is 600 and mar- ginal cost is 600, so 
producing this unit still means overall profits are unchanged. However, expanding output from 4 to 5 would involve a 
marginal revenue of 400 and a marginal cost of 700, so that fifth unit would actually reduce profits. Thus, the 
monopoly can tell from the marginal revenue and mar- ginal cost that of the choices given in the table, the 
profit-maximizing level of output is 4.

Indeed, the monopoly could seek out the profit-maximizing level of output by increasing quantity by a small amount, 
calculating marginal revenue and marginal cost, and then either increasing output as long as marginal revenue exceeds 
marginal cost or reducing output if marginal cost exceeds mar- ginal revenue. This process works without any need to 
calculate total revenue and total cost. Thus, a profit-maximizing monopoly should follow the rule of producing up to 
the quantity where marginal revenue is equal to marginal cost—that is, MR = MC.


MAXIMIZING PROFITS

If you find it counterintuitive that producing where marginal revenue equals marginal cost will maximize profits, 
working through the numbers will help.
Step 1. Remember that marginal cost is defined as the change in total cost from producing a small amount of additional 
output.


Step 2. Note that in Table 3, as output increases from 1 to 2 units, total cost increases from $1500 to $1800. As a 
result, the marginal cost of the second unit will be:




Step 3. Remember that, similarly, marginal revenue is the change in total revenue from selling a small amount of 
additional output.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   355





Step 4. Note that in Table 3, as output increases from 1 to 2 units, total revenue increases from $1200 to $2200. As a 
result, the marginal revenue of the second unit will be:




Quantity    Marginal Revenue    Marginal Cost    Marginal Profit    Total Profit
1                   1,200                             1,500                     –300                           300
2                   1,000                             300                        700                           400
3                   800                                400                        400                           800
4                   600                                600                        0                                800
5                   400                                700                        –300                         500
6                   200                                700                        –500                         0
7                   0                                     1,400                     –1,400                     –1,400
Table 4. Marginal Revenue, Marginal Cost, Marginal and Total Profit

Table  4  repeats  the  marginal  cost  and  marginal  revenue  data  from  Table  3,  and  adds  two  more columns: 
Marginal profit is the profitability of each additional unit sold. It is defined as marginal revenue minus marginal 
cost. Finally, total profit is the sum of marginal profits. As long as marginal profit is positive, producing more 
output will increase total profits. When marginal profit turns neg- ative, producing more output will decrease total 
profits. Total profit is maximized where marginal revenue equals marginal cost. In this example, maximum profit occurs 
at 4 units of output.

A perfectly competitive firm will also find its profit-maximizing level of output where MR = MC. The key difference 
with a perfectly competitive firm is that in the case of perfect competition, marginal revenue is equal to price (MR = 
P), while for a monopolist, marginal revenue is not equal to the price, because changes in quantity of output affect 
the price.

ILLUSTRATING MONOPOLY PROFITS

It is straightforward to calculate profits of given numbers for total revenue and total cost. However, the size of 
monopoly profits can also be illustrated graphically with Figure 4, which takes the marginal cost and marginal revenue 
curves from the previous exhibit and adds an average cost curve and the monopolist’s perceived demand curve.

Figure 5 illustrates the three-step process where a monopolist: selects the profit-maximizing quantity to produce; 
decides what price to charge; determines total revenue, total cost, and profit.

Step 1: Tfte Monopolist Determines Its Profit-Maximizing Level of Output

The firm can use the points on the demand curve D to calculate total revenue, and then, based on total revenue, 
calculate its marginal revenue curve. The profit-maximizing quantity will occur where MR
= MC—or at the last possible point before marginal costs start exceeding marginal revenue. On Fig- ure 4, MR = MC 
occurs at an output of 4.

356                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 
























Figure 4. Illustrating Profits at the HealthPill Monopoly. This figure begins with the same marginal revenue and 
marginal cost curves from the HealthPill monopoly presented in Figure 3. It then adds an average cost curve and the 
demand curve faced by the monopolist. The HealthPill firm first chooses the quantity where MR = MC; in this example, 
the quantity is 4. The monopolist then decides what price to charge by looking at the demand curve it faces. The large 
box, with quantity on the horizon- tal axis and marginal revenue on the vertical axis, shows total revenue for the 
firm. Total costs for the firm are shown by the lighter-shaded box, which is quantity on the horizontal axis and 
marginal cost of production on the vertical axis. The large total revenue box minus the smaller total cost box leaves 
the darkly shaded box that shows total profits. Since the price charged is above average cost, the firm is earning 
positive profits.

Step 2: Tfte Monopolist Decides Wftat Price to Cftarge

The monopolist will charge what the market is willing to pay. A dotted line drawn straight up from the 
profit-maximizing quantity to the demand curve shows the profit-maximizing price. This price is above the average cost 
curve, which shows that the firm is earning profits.

Step 3: Calculate Total Revenue, Total Cost, and Profit

Total revenue is the overall shaded box, where the width of the box is the quantity being sold and the height is the 
price. In Figure 4, the bottom part of the shaded box, which is shaded more lightly, shows total costs; that is, 
quantity on the horizontal axis multiplied by average cost on the vertical axis. The larger box of total revenues minus 
the smaller box of total costs will equal profits, which is shown by the darkly shaded box. In a perfectly competitive 
market, the forces of entry would erode this profit in the long run. But a monopolist is protected by barriers to 
entry. In fact, one telltale sign of a pos- sible monopoly is when a firm earns profits year after year, while doing 
more or less the same thing, without ever seeing those profits eroded by increased competition.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   357




















Figure 5. How a Profit-Maximizing Monopoly Decides Price In Step 1, the monopoly chooses the profit-maximizing level of 
output Q1, by choosing the quantity where MR
=  MC.  In  Step  2,  the  monopoly  decides  how  much  to  charge  for  output  level  1  by drawing a line straight 
up from Q1 to point R on its perceived demand curve. Thus, the monopoly will charge a price (P1). In Step 3, the 
monopoly identifies its profit. Total revenue will be Q1  multiplied by P1. Total cost will be Q1  multiplied by the 
average cost of producing Q1, which is shown by point S on the average cost curve to be P2. Profits will be the total 
revenue rectangle minus the total cost rectangle, shown by the shaded zone in the figure.


WHY IS A MONOPOLIST’S MARGINAL REVENUE ALWAYS LESS THAN THE PRICE?

The marginal revenue curve for a monopolist always lies beneath the market demand curve. To understand why, think about 
increasing the quantity along the demand curve by one unit, so that you take one step down the demand curve to a 
slightly higher quantity but a slightly lower price. A demand curve is not sequential: It is not that first we sell Q1 
at a higher price, and then we sell Q2 at a lower price. Rather, a demand curve is conditional: If we charge the higher 
price, we would sell Q1. If, instead, we charge a lower price (on all the units that we sell), we would sell Q2.
So when we think about increasing the quantity sold by one unit, marginal revenue is affected in two ways. First, we 
sell one additional unit at the new market price. Second, all the previous units, which could have been sold at the 
higher price, now sell for less. Because of the lower price on all units sold, the marginal revenue of selling a unit 
is less than the price of that unit—and the marginal revenue curve is below the demand curve. Tip: For a straight-line 
demand curve, MR and demand have the same vertical intercept. As output increases, marginal revenue decreases twice as 
fast as demand, so that the horizontal intercept of MR is halfway to the horizontal intercept of demand. You can see 
this in the Figure 6.


THE INEFFICIENCY OF MONOPOLY

Most people criticize monopolies because they charge too high a price, but what economists object

358                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 






















Figure 6. The Monopolist’s Marginal Revenue Curve versus Demand Curve. Because the market demand curve is conditional, 
the marginal revenue curve for a monopo- list lies beneath the demand curve.
to is that monopolies do not supply enough output to be allocatively efficient. To understand why a monopoly is 
inefficient, it is useful to compare it with the benchmark model of perfect competition.

Allocative efficiency is a social concept. It refers to producing the optimal quantity of some output, the quantity 
where the marginal benefit to society of one more unit just equals the marginal cost. The rule of profit maximization 
in a world of perfect competition was for each firm to produce the quan- tity of output where P = MC, where the price 
(P) is a measure of how much buyers value the good and the marginal cost (MC) is a measure of what marginal units cost 
society to produce. Following this rule assures allocative efficiency. If P > MC, then the marginal benefit to society 
(as measured by P) is greater than the marginal cost to society of producing additional units, and a greater quantity 
should be produced. But in the case of monopoly, price is always greater than marginal cost at the profit- maximizing 
level of output, as can be seen by looking back at Figure 4. Thus, consumers will suffer from a monopoly because a 
lower quantity will be sold in the market, at a higher price, than would have been the case in a perfectly competitive 
market.

The  problem  of  inefficiency  for  monopolies  often  runs  even  deeper  than  these  issues,  and  also involves 
incentives for efficiency over longer periods of time. There are counterbalancing incentives here. On one side, firms 
may strive for new inventions and new intellectual property because they want  to  become  monopolies  and  earn  high  
profits—at  least  for  a  few  years  until  the  competition catches up. In this way, monopolies may come to exist 
because of competitive pressures on firms. However, once a barrier to entry is in place, a monopoly that does not need 
to fear competition can just produce the same old products in the same old way—while still ringing up a healthy rate of 
profit. John Hicks, who won the Nobel Prize for economics in 1972, wrote in 1935: “The best of all monop- oly  profits  
is  a  quiet  life.”  He  did  not  mean  the  comment  in  a  complimentary  way.  He  meant  that monopolies may bank 
their profits and slack off on trying to please their customers.

When AT&T provided all of the local and long-distance phone service in the United States, along with manufacturing most 
of the phone equipment, the payment plans and types of phones did not change

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   359

much. The old joke was that you could have any color phone you wanted, as long as it was black. But in 1982, AT&T was 
split up by government litigation into a number of local phone companies, a long-distance phone company, and a phone 
equipment manufacturer. An explosion of innovation fol- lowed. Services like call waiting, caller ID, three-way 
calling, voice mail though the phone company, mobile phones, and wireless connections to the Internet all became 
available. A wide range of pay- ment plans was offered, as well. It was no longer true that all phones were black; 
instead, phones came in a wide variety of shapes and colors. The end of the telephone monopoly brought lower prices, a 
greater quantity of services, and also a wave of innovation aimed at attracting and pleasing customers.


THE REST IS HISTORY

In the opening case, the East India Company and the Confederate States were presented as a monopoly or near monopoly 
provider of a good. Nearly every American schoolchild knows the result of the ‘unwelcome visit’ the ‘Mohawks’ bestowed 
upon Boston Harbor’s tea-bearing ships—the Boston Tea Party. Regarding the cotton industry, we also know Great Britain 
remained neutral during the Civil War, taking neither side during the conflict.
Did the monopoly nature of these business have unintended and historical consequences? Might the American Revolution 
have been deterred, if the East India Company had sailed the tea-bearing ships back to England? Might the southern 
states have made different decisions had they not been so confident “King Cotton” would force diplomatic recognition of 
the Confederate States of America? Of course, it is not possible to definitively answer these questions; after all we 
cannot roll back the clock and try a different scenario. We can, however, consider the monopoly nature of these 
businesses and the roles they played and hypothesize about what might have occurred under different circumstances.
Perhaps if there had been legal free tea trade, the colonists would have seen things differently; there was smuggled 
Dutch tea in the colonial market. If the colonists had been able to freely purchase Dutch tea, they would have paid 
lower prices and avoided the tax.
What about the cotton monopoly? With one in five jobs in Great Britain depending on Southern cotton and the Confeder- 
ate States nearly the sole provider of that cotton, why did Great Britain remain neutral during the Civil War? At the 
begin- ning of the war, Britain simply drew down massive stores of cotton. These stockpiles lasted until near the end 
of 1862. Why did Britain not recognize the Confederacy at that point? Two reasons: The Emancipation Proclamation and 
new sources of cotton. Having outlawed slavery throughout the United Kingdom in 1833, it was politically impossible for 
Great Britain, empty cotton warehouses or not, to recognize, diplomatically, the Confederate States. In addition, 
during the two years it took to draw down the stockpiles, Britain expanded cotton imports from India, Egypt, and 
Brazil.
Monopoly  sellers  often  see  no  threats  to  their  superior  marketplace  position.  In  these  examples  did  the  
power  of  the monopoly blind the decision makers to other possibilities? Perhaps. But, as they say, the rest is 
history.


KEY CONCEPTS AND SUMMARY

A monopolist is not a price taker, because when it decides what quantity to produce, it also determines the market 
price. For a monopolist, total revenue is relatively low at low quantities of output, because not much is being sold. 
Total revenue is also relatively low at very high quantities of output, because a very high quantity will sell only at 
a low price. Thus, total revenue for a monopolist will start low, rise, and then decline. The marginal revenue for a 
monopolist from selling additional units will decline. Each additional unit sold by a monopolist will push down the 
overall market price, and as more units are sold, this lower price applies to more and more units.

The monopolist will select the profit-maximizing level of output where MR = MC, and then charge the price for that 
quantity of output as determined by the market demand curve. If that price is above average cost, the monopolist earns 
positive profits.

360                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


Monopolists are not productively efficient, because they do not produce at the minimum of the aver- age cost curve. 
Monopolists are not allocatively efficient, because they do not produce at the quantity where P = MC. As a result, 
monopolists produce less, at a higher average cost, and charge a higher price than would a combination of firms in a 
perfectly competitive industry. Monopolists also may lack incentives for innovation, because they need not fear entry.

SELF-CHECK QUESTIONS



1.    Suppose demand for a monopoly’s product falls so that its profit-maximizing price is below average variable cost. 
How much output should the firm supply? Hint: Draw the graph.
2.    Imagine a monopolist could charge a different price to every customer based on how much he or she were willing to 
pay. How would this affect monopoly profits?



REVIEW QUESTIONS



1.    How is the demand curve perceived by a perfectly competitive firm different from the demand curve perceived by a 
monopolist?
2.    How does the demand curve perceived by a monopolist compare with the market demand curve?
3.    Is a monopolist a price taker? Explain briefly.
4.    What is the usual shape of a total revenue curve for a monopolist? Why?
5.    What is the usual shape of a marginal revenue curve for a monopolist? Why?
6.    How can a monopolist identify the profit-maximizing level of output if it knows its total revenue and total cost 
curves?
7.    How can a monopolist identify the profit-maximizing level of output if it knows its marginal revenue and marginal 
costs?
8.    When a monopolist identifies its profit-maximizing quantity of output, how does it decide what price to charge?
9.    Is a monopolist allocatively efficient? Why or why not?
10.    How does the quantity produced and price charged by a monopolist compare to that of a perfectly competitive 
firm?



CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS



1.    Imagine that you are managing a small firm and thinking about entering the market of a monopolist. The monopolist 
is currently charging a high price, and you have calculated that you can make a nice profit charging 10% less than the 
monopolist. Before you go ahead and challenge the monopolist, what possibility should you consider for how the 
monopolist might react?
2.    If a monopoly firm is earning profits, how much would you expect these profits to be diminished by entry in the 
long run?

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   361




PROBLEMS



1.    Draw the demand curve, marginal revenue, and marginal cost curves from Figure 4, and identify the quantity of 
output the monopoly wishes to supply and the price it will charge. Suppose demand for the monopoly’s product increases 
dramatically. Draw the new demand curve. What happens to the marginal revenue as a result of the increase in demand? 
What happens to the marginal cost curve? Identify the new profit-maximizing quantity and price. Does the answer make 
sense to you?
2.    Draw a monopolist’s demand curve, marginal revenue, and marginal cost curves. Identify the monopolist’s 
profit-maximizing output level. Now, think about a slightly higher level of output (say Q0 + 1). According to the 
graph, is there any consumer willing to pay more than the marginal cost of that new level of output? If so, what does 
this mean?



REFERENCES
Aboukhadijeh, Feross. “Chapter 20: Girding for War – The North and the South, 1861-1865.” Stu- dyNotes,    Inc.    
Accessed    July    7,    2013.    http://www.apstudynotes.org/us-history/outlines/chap- 
ter-20-girding-for-war-the-north-and-the-south-1861-1865/.

British Parliament. “(28 August 1833). Slavery Abolition Act 1833; Section LXIV.” Accessed July 2013. 
http://www.pdavis.nl/Legis_07.htm.

Dattel,   E.   (nd).   “Cotton   and   the   Civil   War.”   Mississippi   Historical   Society.   Accessed   July   
2013. http://mshistorynow.mdah.state.ms.us/articles/291/cotton-and-the-civil-war.

Gartner. 2015. “Gartner Says Tablet Sales Continue to Be Slow in 2015.” Accessed March 12, 2015. 
http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/2954317.

Grogan, David. 2015. “Federal Judge Finds AmEx’s Anti-Steering Rule Violates Antitrust Law.” Amer- ican  Booksellers  
Association.  Accessed  March  12,  2015.  http://www.bookweb.org/news/federal- 
judge-finds-amex%E2%80%99s-anti-steering-rule-violates-antitrust-law.

Massachusetts Historical Society. “The Coming of the American Revolution 1764-1776: The Boston Tea Party.” Retrieved 
from http://www.masshist.org/revolution/teaparty.php.

Massachusetts  Historical  Society.  “Whereas  our  Nation.”  The  Massachusetts  Gazette,  p.  2.  Accessed July       
                                   2013                                          
http://www.masshist.org/revolution/image- viewer.php?old=1&item_id=457&img_step=1&nmask=1&mode=large.

Pelegrin, William. 2015. “Judge Overrules Antitrust Case Against Google , Says Setting Default Search Engines  Is  
Fair.”  Digital  Trends.  Accessed  March  12,  2015.  http://www.digitaltrends.com/mobile/ 
judge-tosses-out-google-antitrust-lawsuit/.

GLOSSARY

allocative efficiency producing the optimal quantity of some output; the quantity where the marginal benefit to society 
of one more unit just equals the marginal cost

362                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


marginal profit profit of one more unit of output, computed as marginal revenue minus marginal cost

SOLUTIONS



Answers to Self-Cfteck Questions

1.    If price falls below AVC, the firm will not be able to earn enough revenues even to cover its variable costs. In 
such a case, it will suffer a smaller loss if it shuts down and produces no output. By contrast, if it stayed in 
operation and produced the level of output where MR = MC, it would lose all of its fixed costs plus some variable 
costs. If it shuts down, it only loses its fixed costs.
2.    This scenario is called “perfect price discrimination.” The result would be that the monopolist would produce 
more output, the same amount in fact as would be produced by a perfectly competitive industry. However, there would be 
no consumer surplus since each buyer is paying exactly what they think the product is worth. Therefore, the monopolist 
would be earning the maximum possible profits.
