


1.2  MICROECONOMICS  AND  MACROECONOMICS



LEARNING OBJECTIVES


By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Describe microeconomics
•    Describe macroeconomics
•    Contrast monetary policy and fiscal policy



conomics is concerned with the well-being of all people, including those with jobs and those without  jobs,  as  well  
as  those  with  high  incomes  and  those  with  low  incomes.  Economics acknowledges that production of useful goods 
and services can create problems of environ- mental pollution. It explores the question of how investing in education 
helps to develop workers’ skills. It probes questions like how to tell when big businesses or big labor unions are 
operating in a way that benefits society as a whole and when they are operating in a way that benefits their owners or 
members at the expense of others. It looks at how government spending, taxes, and regulations
affect decisions about production and consumption.

It should be clear by now that economics covers a lot of ground. That ground can be divided into two  parts:  
Microeconomics  focuses  on  the  actions  of  individual  agents  within  the  economy,  like households, workers, and 
businesses; Macroeconomics looks at the economy as a whole. It focuses on  broad  issues  such  as  growth  of  
production,  the  number  of  unemployed  people,  the  inflation- ary increase in prices, government deficits, and 
levels of exports and imports. Microeconomics and macroeconomics are not separate subjects, but rather complementary 
perspectives on the overall sub- ject of the economy.

To understand why both microeconomic and macroeconomic perspectives are useful, consider the problem of studying a 
biological ecosystem like a lake. One person who sets out to study the lake might focus on specific topics: certain 
kinds of algae or plant life; the characteristics of particular fish or snails; or the trees surrounding the lake. 
Another person might take an overall view and instead consider the entire ecosystem of the lake from top to bottom; 
what eats what, how the system stays in a rough balance, and what environmental stresses affect this balance. Both 
approaches are useful, and both examine the same lake, but the viewpoints are different. In a similar way, both 
microeconomics and macroeconomics study the same economy, but each has a different viewpoint.

Whether you are looking at lakes or economics, the micro and the macro insights should blend with each other. In 
studying a lake, the micro insights about particular plants and animals help to under-

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                      11

stand the overall food chain, while the macro insights about the overall food chain help to explain the environment in 
which individual plants and animals live.

In  economics,  the  micro  decisions  of  individual  businesses  are  influenced  by  whether  the  macro- economy is 
healthy; for example, firms will be more likely to hire workers if the overall economy is growing. In turn, the 
performance of the macroeconomy ultimately depends on the microeconomic decisions made by individual households and 
businesses.

MICROECONOMICS

What determines how households and individuals spend their budgets? What combination of goods and services will best 
fit their needs and wants, given the budget they have to spend? How do people decide whether to work, and if so, 
whether to work full time or part time? How do people decide how much to save for the future, or whether they should 
borrow to spend beyond their current means?

What determines the products, and how many of each, a firm will produce and sell? What determines what prices a firm 
will charge? What determines how a firm will produce its products? What deter- mines how many workers it will hire? How 
will a firm finance its business? When will a firm decide to expand, downsize, or even close? In the microeconomic part 
of this book, we will learn about the theory of consumer behavior and the theory of the firm.

MACROECONOMICS

What determines the level of economic activity in a society? In other words, what determines how many goods and 
services a nation actually produces? What determines how many jobs are available in an economy? What determines a 
nation’s standard of living? What causes the economy to speed up or slow down? What causes firms to hire more workers 
or to lay workers off? Finally, what causes the economy to grow over the long term?

An economy’s macroeconomic health can be defined by a number of goals: growth in the standard of living, low 
unemployment, and low inflation, to name the most important. How can macroeco- nomic policy be used to pursue these 
goals? Monetary policy, which involves policies that affect bank lending, interest rates, and financial capital 
markets, is conducted by a nation’s central bank. For the United States, this is the Federal  Reserve. Fiscal policy, 
which involves government  spending  and taxes, is determined by a nation’s legislative body. For the United States, 
this is the Congress and the executive branch, which originates the federal budget. These are the main tools the 
government has to work with. Americans tend to expect that government can fix whatever economic problems we encounter, 
but to what extent is that expectation realistic? These are just some of the issues that will be explored in the 
macroeconomic chapters of this book.

KEY CONCEPTS AND SUMMARY

Microeconomics and macroeconomics are two different perspectives on the economy. The micro- economic perspective 
focuses on parts of the economy: individuals, firms, and industries. The macro- economic perspective looks at the 
economy as a whole, focusing on goals like growth in the standard of living, unemployment, and inflation. 
Macroeconomics has two types of policies for pursuing these goals: monetary policy and fiscal policy.

12                     ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 



SELF-CHECK QUESTIONS


What would be another example of a “system” in the real world that could serve as a metaphor for micro and macro- 
economics?



REVIEW QUESTIONS


1.    What is the difference between microeconomics and macroeconomics?
2.    What are examples of individual economic agents?
3.    What are the three main goals of macroeconomics?



CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS


1.    A balanced federal budget and a balance of trade are considered secondary goals of macroeconomics, while growth 
in the standard of living (for example) is considered a primary goal. Why do you think that is so?
2.    Macroeconomics is an aggregate of what happens at the microeconomic level. Would it be possible for what happens 
at the macro level to differ from how economic agents would react to some stimulus at the micro level? Hint: Think 
about the behavior of crowds.



GLOSSARY

fiscal policy economic policies that involve government spending and taxes macroeconomics the branch of economics that 
focuses on broad issues such as growth, unemployment, inflation, and trade balance.
microeconomics the branch of economics that focuses on actions of particular agents within the economy, like 
households, workers, and business firms
monetary policy policy that involves altering the level of interest rates, the availability of credit in the economy, 
and the extent of borrowing

SOLUTIONS


Answers to Self-Cfteck Questions
There are many physical systems that would work, for example, the study of planets (micro) in the solar system (macro), 
or solar systems (micro) in the galaxy (macro).



1.3  HOW  ECONOMISTS  USE  THEORIES  AND  MODELS  TO UNDERSTAND  ECONOMIC  ISSUES



LEARNING OBJECTIVES


By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Interpret a circular flow diagram
•    Explain the importance of economic theories and models
•    Describe goods and services markets and labor markets
















Figure  1.  John  Maynard  Keynes. One of the most influential econ- omists in modern times was John Maynard  Keynes.  
(Credit:  Wiki- media Commons)

oftn Maynard Keynes  (1883–1946),  one  of  the  greatest  economists  of  the  twentieth  century, pointed out that 
economics is not just a subject area but also a way of thinking. Keynes, shown in Figure  1,  famously  wrote  in  the  
introduction  to  a  fellow  economist’s  book:  “[Economics]  is  a method rather than a doctrine, an apparatus of the 
mind, a technique of thinking, which helps its pos- sessor to draw correct conclusions.” In other words, economics 
teaches you how to think, not what to
think.

14                     ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 



Watch this video about John Maynard Keynes and his influence on economics.











Economists see the world through a different lens than anthropologists, biologists, classicists, or prac- titioners of 
any other discipline. They analyze issues and problems with economic theories that are based on particular assumptions 
about human behavior, that are different than the assumptions an anthropologist or psychologist might use. A tfteory is 
a simplified representation of how two or more variables interact with each other. The purpose of a theory is to take a 
complex, real-world issue and simplify it down to its essentials. If done well, this enables the analyst to understand 
the issue and any problems around it. A good theory is simple enough to be understood, while complex enough to cap- 
ture the key features of the object or situation being studied.

Sometimes economists use the term model instead of theory. Strictly speaking, a theory is a more abstract 
representation, while a model is more applied or empirical representation. Models are used to test theories, but for 
this course we will use the terms interchangeably.

For example, an architect who is planning a major office building will often build a physical model that sits on a 
tabletop to show how the entire city block will look after the new building is constructed. Companies often build 
models of their new products, which are more rough and unfinished than the final product will be, but can still 
demonstrate how the new product will work.

A good model to start with in economics is the circular flow diagram, which is shown in Figure 2. It pictures the 
economy as consisting of two groups—households and firms—that interact in two mar- kets: the goods and services market 
in which firms sell and households buy and the labor market in which households sell labor to business firms or other 
employees.

Of course, in the real world, there are many different markets for goods and services and markets for many different 
types of labor. The circular flow diagram simplifies this to make the picture easier to grasp. In the diagram, firms 
produce goods and services, which they sell to households in return for revenues. This is shown in the outer circle, 
and represents the two sides of the product market (for example, the market for goods and services) in which households 
demand and firms supply. House- holds sell their labor as workers to firms in return for wages, salaries and benefits. 
This is shown in the inner circle and represents the two sides of the labor market in which households supply and firms 
demand.

This version of the circular flow model is stripped down to the essentials, but it has enough features to explain how 
the product and labor markets work in the economy. We could easily add details to this basic model if we wanted to 
introduce more real-world elements, like financial markets, govern- ments, and interactions with the rest of the globe 
(imports and exports).

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                      15

















Figure 2.  The  Circular  Flow  Diagram.  The  circular  flow  diagram shows how households and firms interact in the 
goods and services market, and in the labor market. The direction of the arrows shows that  in  the  goods  and  
services  market,  households  receive  goods and  services  and  pay  firms  for  them.  In  the  labor  market,  
house- holds provide labor and receive payment from firms through wages, salaries, and benefits.

Economists carry a set of theories in their heads like a carpenter carries around a toolkit. When they see an economic 
issue or problem, they go through the theories they know to see if they can find one that fits. Then they use the 
theory to derive insights about the issue or problem. In economics, the- ories are expressed as diagrams, graphs, or 
even as mathematical equations. (Do not worry. In this course, we will mostly use graphs.) Economists do not figure out 
the answer to the problem first and then draw the graph to illustrate. Rather, they use the graph of the theory to help 
them figure out the answer. Although at the introductory level, you can sometimes figure out the right answer without 
applying a model, if you keep studying economics, before too long you will run into issues and prob- lems that you will 
need to graph to solve. Both micro and macroeconomics are explained in terms of theories and models. The most 
well-known theories are probably those of supply and demand, but you will learn a number of others.

KEY CONCEPTS AND SUMMARY

Economists analyze problems differently than do other disciplinary experts. The main tools econo- mists use are 
economic theories or models. A theory is not an illustration of the answer to a problem. Rather, a theory is a tool for 
determining the answer.

SELF-CHECK QUESTIONS


1.    Suppose we extend the circular flow model to add imports and exports. Copy the circular flow diagram

16                     ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 



onto a sheet of paper and then add a foreign country as a third agent. Draw a rough sketch of the flows of imports, 
exports, and the payments for each on your diagram.
2.    What is an example of a problem in the world today, not mentioned in the chapter, that has an economic dimension?



REVIEW QUESTIONS


1.    How did John Maynard Keynes define economics?
2.    Are households primarily buyers or sellers in the goods and services market? In the labor market?
3.    Are firms primarily buyers or sellers in the goods and services market? In the labor market?



CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS


1.    Why is it unfair or meaningless to criticize a theory as “unrealistic?”
2.    Suppose, as an economist, you are asked to analyze an issue unlike anything you have ever done before. Also, 
suppose you do not have a specific model for analyzing that issue. What should you do? Hint: What would a carpenter do 
in a similar situation?



GLOSSARY

circular flow diagram a diagram that views the economy as consisting of households and firms interacting in a goods and 
services market and a labor market
goods and services market a market in which firms are sellers of what they produce and households are buyers
labor market the market in which households sell their labor as workers to business firms or other employers
model see theory
tfteory a representation of an object or situation that is simplified while including enough of the key features to 
help us understand the object or situation

SOLUTIONS


Answers to Self-Cfteck Questions

1.    Draw a box outside the original circular flow to represent the foreign country. Draw an arrow from the foreign 
country to firms, to represents imports. Draw an arrow in the reverse direction representing payments for imports. Draw 
an arrow from firms to the foreign country to represent exports. Draw an arrow in the reverse direction to represent 
payments for imports.
2.    There are many such problems. Consider the AIDS epidemic. Why are so few AIDS patients in Africa and

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                      17
Southeast Asia treated with the same drugs that are effective in the United States and Europe? It is because neither 
those patients nor the countries in which they live have the resources to purchase the same drugs.
