


14.2  INDUSTRIALIZATION  AND  THE  FACTORY



fter the Civil War, the United States economy passed into an era of rapid industrialization. The term industrialization 
is used here to describe a process of development that reorganizes pro- ductive activities such that they conform to a 
machine logic, as opposed to a handicraft logic.
That  is,  the  economy  becomes  increasingly  constituted  by  a  series  of  interconnected  machine processes. When 
we think of the United States undergoing industrialization we are really envisioning its economy becoming a large-scale 
machine, capable of churning out all of the goods required to sus- tain the community efficiently and to sustain the 
machine itself, through production of intermediate goods.  When  we  think  of  the  economy  as  industrializing  we  
are  actually  considering  a  qualitative change in the economic system. To better understand what a qualitative 
change in the economic sys- tem entails, consider the following key features of an industrialized, machine process 
economy.

LARGE-SCALE TECHNOLOGIES THAT MAKE UP THE CORE OF THE ECONOMIC SYSTEM.
Particular combinations of technology incorporated into the economic system were massive in scale. For example, 
consider again the case of the railroads. We have previously discussed why railroads required administration from the 
managerial bodies of corporate entities capable of organizing the business over the scale and scope of its activities. 
The technology itself was massive – establishment of steam powered with a rail and car transportation system over vast 
geographical areas was quite literally the greatest engineering marvel that humans had achieved to date. With the 
railroads came the telegraph, which created the possibility for transnational and interregional rapid communication. 
Other hallmark technologies of an industrializing 19th century American economy include: electric light and power, 
streetcars, improvements in steel production, and petroleum refining.

INTEGRATED CHAINS OF PRODUCTION THAT LINK MARKETS AND INDUSTRIES.
The largeness of the business enterprise implies a high degree of interconnectedness between differ- ent stages in the 
production of the social product. To illustrate our point, consider the generation and provisioning of electric power. 
We can envision a simplified model of electric generation by breaking the whole production process into four stages:

1.   Production of fuel source. In this example, we will assume we’re talking about a coal fired power plant. This is a 
good choice, because coal served as the primary fuel source for electric generating during its advent in the United 
States. Coal is produced by mining and is subject to geological processes that have resulted in an uneven spatial 
allocation of coal in the earth’s crust. Therefore, coal can only be mined in certain areas. The story of coal in 
America begins in Pennsylvania.
2.   Energy conversion. The chemical energy embodied in coal must be converted into mechanical energy before it may be 
used to generate electricity. This conversion process is accomplished by burning the coal to transform water into 
steam, which creates the

406                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 

































Figure 7. Atlas of the Historical Geography of the United States, Plate 140 by Charles O. Paullin. Curated by the 
Carnegie Institution of Science

necessary pressure to power an engine. The engine now embodies some of the energy that existed in the coal, less losses 
due to inefficiencies in the conversion process. The steam engine itself is the product of a set of interconnected 
production processes.
3.   Electric Generation. The mechanical energy of the steam engine is then used to power an electric generator. 
Electric generators require steel, copper, and most importantly, a patent to produce.
4.   Distribution. Once generated, the electricity is distributed to the end user via cables that conduct electricity. 
Edison’s first system in New York used copper as its conductor.

If you think about each of these stages of production occurring as a production process that occupies a different space 
geographically, then you begin to see how something like the  provisioning of electric- ity is really a network of 
interdependent production processes that establishes connections between different regions. Coal is mined in 
Pennsylvania, and then shipped to New York for use as fuel in the production of steam. A boiler and steam-powered 
electric generator is purchased from a firm in New York that is licensed to sell Edison patented systems. Edison’s 
generators are produced in upstate New York and require a steady flow of steel from Pennsylvania and copper from 
Michigan for ongo- ing production. And so on. Every single economic activity is the product of an orchestra of inter- 
connected production processes. To function efficiently those interdependencies must be managed so

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   407
that they they function as a whole machine. This is what we mean when we describe the economy as industrialized.



14.3  BIG  BUSINESS  AND  ORGANIZED  LABOR



s the business enterprise becomes large it operates on a scale of production that requires the labor of a 
proportionally large number of workers. The managers of the firm must ensure that they reliably and efficiently meet 
their production goals. To achieve this end, managers estab-
lished methods for controlling their labor force so that rate of production remains within their full discretion. 
Introduction of mechanization into the production process serves as one historical exam- ple of the methods of 
controlling labor. Mechanization establishes the pace of production, by power- ing machine technology. For example, an 
assembly line sets the rate at which workers must labor. In this sense, workers on an assembly line must work at 
roughly the same pace, harmonizing their col- lected labor. By adjusting the speed of the machine, worker productivity 
may be adjusted across the board as desired, subject to physical limits of the labor force. Similarly, the machine 
process results in a “deskilling” process, which tends to homogenize the labor requirements for production. Deskilling 
transforms the labor process by removing the power that workers enjoy via their specialized knowl- edge of craft 
production. Machine production depends, to a much lesser degree, on the specialized knowledge of workers. Instead, this 
knowledge is transferred to the managerial class, who may pos- sess knowledge of the machine and its technical 
requirements or retain the expertise of an engineer.

Loss of worker control over the production process results in the ability for the managerial class to retain a larger 
share of the monetary value of the output of the labor process. Managerial focus on cost efficiency and meeting its 
production targets, coupled with control over the labor process, resulted in dangerous and poor working conditions. The 
large business enterprise, by exercising its control over the labor process in order to exploit its workers, created 
the conditions for the emergence for an organized labor movement.

An exhaustive review of the labor history in the United States is beyond our reach, however, we may highlight some of 
the major themes and events that helped shape its development.

THE KNIGHTS OF LABOR
Organized in 1869 by tailors in Pennsylvania, the secret organization named the Noble Order of the Knights of Labor 
would serve as an organizational body for workers seeking collective action follow- ing the Panic of 1873. Coal miners 
helped drive membership growth in the Knights of Labor through the depression of the 1870s. By 1884 there were 70,000 
members of the Knights of Labor. By 1886 this figure exploded to 700,000.

The Knights of Labor participated in strikes in order to achieve their primary goal of an 8 hour work- day. Most 
notably, the Knights of Labor won a struggle against Jay Gould over a dispute concerning the Wabash Railroad in 1885.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   409

THE GREAT RAILWAY STRIKE OF 1877
Railroads figure prominently in the course of American economic history for they have left lasting and transformative 
imprints on the course of development. It is natural, then, to link a major moment in the history of the labor movement 
to consequences of railroad speculation and administration. The economic depression of the 1870’s was global in nature 
and was caused largely by a financial crisis related to the value of railroad securities. The Panic of 1873 emerged 
from a financial system that had become increasingly fragile during the speculative episode in railroad securities, 
mostly bonds, following the Civil  War. Jay Cooke, a major  US banker during the latter  part  of the 19th  century, 
was heavily vested in the market for Northern Pacific bonds to interests in Europe. During the 1870s Europeans were 
less keen to accept the risk associated with holding American railroad bonds. In turn, this led to the inability for 
Cooke to continue issuing debt and ultimately resulted in his firm becom- ing insolvent. The failure of Jay Cooke & 
Company set off a wave of bank failures and a closure of the New York Stock Exchange. The result of this financial 
panic was a nearly decade long depression.

As a result, railroads were under pressure to cut their labor costs. Notable railroads such as the Penn- sylvania  and  
Baltimore  &  Ohio  Railroads  had  administered  waves  of  wage  cuts.  Railroad  workers organized themselves in the 
summer of 1877 and succeeded in bringing the railroad system in the eastern part of the United States to a grinding 
halt. Striking railroad workers were joined by sympa- thetic workers in other mining and manufacturing sectors, which 
resulted in fears on the part of the state and business interests that labor was growing into a coherent and powerful 
countervailing force. To quell the strikers, initially local militias were deployed. However, local militias were 
ineffective due to their propensity to defect and join the strikers, as they found themselves in common interest with 
their fellow members of the community. Consequently, National Guard and federal troops were brought into cities under 
the control of the strikers and were far more effective, because the soldiers were not particularly vested with the 
interests of the community and more likely to follow the orders of their commanding officers.

The strikes of 1877 serve as an important moment in the development of the political economy of the  labor  situation  
in  the  United  States.  Following  the  strikes,  membership  in  labor  organizations increased  substantially.  
Likewise,  more  national  guard  units  were  established  with  an  eye  toward checking the power of labor going 
forward. In the realm of economic theory, the struggle between big business and big labor was taken as a serious matter 
of consideration. The development of neoclassi- cal economics owes much of its theory of distribution to the 
international labor struggle that reached a fever pitch in the 1870s. For example, John Bates Clark, the father of the 
marginal product theory of distribution, was working out a theory of distribution that sought to move consideration of 
the distribution of the social product away from conflict between social classes, toward one based upon marginal 
contributions of each factor of production (land, labor, capital) in the production process. The result, is a 
theoretical system that finds fairness in an unequal distribution of income and wealth. Bates’ theory was a direct 
response to the class conflict embodied in events like the Great Strikes of 1877.

While it is not possible to give the history of the labor movement in the United States a thorough treatment here, we 
can summarize some of central implications and consequences:

•   Ongoing coherence and emphasize around the demand for an 8 hour working day.
•   Development of systems of administration and organization capable of exerting a countervailing force against big 
business.

410                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 













































Maryland National Guard Sixth Regiment fighting to suppress strikers in Baltimore. Harper’s  Weekly,  Journal  of  
Civilization,  Vol  XXL,  No.  1076,  New  York.  Public domain.

•   Formation of institutions capable of allowing workers to regain some of the control over production that was lost 
with the demise of handicraft production as a result of industrialization.
