


14.4  REGULATION  OF  BIG  BUSINESS



central problem facing the business enterprise is maintaining the orderly governance of the markets in which they 
operate. The going concern wishes to form stable expectations over the viability of its business through time. An 
industrialized economics system means that firms are embedded in networks of interdependent financial flows, which 
suggests that firms must find mech- anisms to coordinate their operations and establish norms governing how other 
participants in the markets will behave, especially via their pricing policy.  Formal and informal cartel systems were 
fre- quently  established  in  an  attempt  to  bring  harmony  to  markets.  Earlier  we  have  referred  to  these 
arrangements  as  restrictive trade practices,  due  to  their  objective  of  avoiding  price  competition between  
firms  over  market  share.  Recall,  the  business  enterprise  must  ensure  that  it  is  capable  of administering 
a price to the market that embodies a sufficient markup that recovers their costs over some defined period. Prices must 
be also provide a flow of income to its shareholders as profits, as well as a means of accumulating funds for 
investment purposes. If firms engage in a price war to cap- ture  a  larger  share  of  the  market,  they  will  
undermine  their  revenue  streams  and  have  difficulty achieving their desired cash flows. The solution is to 
institute controls on individual firms so that they
are properly incentivized to cooperate.

Market governance institutions are best viewed as efforts on the part of the business community to socialize the risks 
and rewards to individual firms. However, voluntary and privately organized mar- ket governance institutions were not 
terribly stable. There was always the risk that some participants would defect and undermine the cooperative agreement, 
resulting in a newfound round of ruinous competition.

A solution to the instability of private market governance structures was found in the federal gov- ernment. The 
Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) was established in 1887 in order to provide regulation  over  railroad  rates,  
and  emerged  largely  as  a  result  of  lobbying  efforts  by  the  railroads themselves. Government regulation  over 
markets was not new to the American  economic history. However, establishment of the ICC resulted in the federal 
government exercising its discretion over of the development of economic affairs, by instituting a new form of market 
governance by regulatory commission. With a standing commission now responsible for authorizing proposed rate schedules 
the problem of coordinating and enforcing voluntary rate design policies solved by outsourcing this function to the 
federal government.

The Interstate Commerce Commission emerged as a result of two political processes. On one hand, agricultural interests 
organized through the Grange, Patrons of Husbandry, and the like, viewed rail- roads as monopolies that extracted 
unfair monetary flows from them by charging exorbitant rates, and administering differential rate schedules that had 
the effect of advantaging some ratepayers at the expense of others, and undermining the ability for some farmers to 
bring their goods to market. These agricultural interests tended to view their monopoly power as the primary concern, 
and sought to compel railroads to act as if they were competitive and thereby undermine their ability to cap-

412                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 

ture rents. Businessmen in the railroad and finance industry sought regulation as a means to ensure coordination  
between  competitors,  but  held  different  views  about  how  such  regulation  should  be structured. Ultimately, 
the railway interests embraced the ICC for it helped to quell anti-monopolist agitated while preserving private control 
and ownership of the railway system.

THE SHERMAN ACT

The 1890s mark a turning point in American economic history. Historians generally mark 1890 as the close of the 
frontier, as the transcontinental railways had linked the Pacific with the Atlantic and allowed for rapid and low cost 
transportation and communication. In the 1890s cities in the United States began electrifying. By the 1890s, big 
business had become a powerful and central organizing institution in the American economy.  Passage of the Sherman Act 
in 1890 serves as an important landmark in the history of big business and provides a useful bookend for delineating a 
new phase in the American economic development.

The Sherman Act of 1890 sought to prohibit behavior that may be construed as acting in restraint of trade. The 
anti-trust act makes illegal cartels and conspiracies to engage in price fixing. Consequently, some mechanisms that 
firms relied upon previously to govern markets were no longer legal, such as pooling arrangements and cartels. While 
the Sherman Act was seldom applied in earnest as a means to restrain corporate power, it did encourage the practice of 
firms attempting to consolidate control through mergers and acquisitions of their competitors.

The first great merger wave occurs between 1895 and 1904 and represents the effect of the Sherman Act on the methods by 
which firms attempted to control markets in the wake of the Panic of 1893. Efforts by firms to capture more market 
share in order to spread their fixed costs more widely, led to ruinous price wars. Since previous forms of market 
governance had been largely prohibited by law in the Sherman Act, firms responded by consolidating in order to 
eliminate the costs associated with redundant capacity in light of the depressed economic conditions of the early 
1890s. Between 1895 and 1904 roughly 300 firms disappeared on an annual average basis. From 1898 to 1902 this wave of 
mergers was particularly acute, with 1028 firms lost to consolidation in 1899 alone. The 1890s merger movement produced 
some of the more notable monopolies in American history, such as U.S. Steel, American Tobacco, Du Pont, and 
International Harvester.

The Sherman Act, when measured by its efficacy in preventing the consolidation of corporate control, was  a  total  
failure.  However,  it  is  important  to  note  its  foundational  importance  to  subsequent processes of coevolution 
between the going concern as big business and the legal framework. Exten- sive revision of the laws governing corporate 
behavior would occur in the 20th century. Nevertheless, the Sherman Act serves as a an excellent reference point for a 
turning point in the history of the cor- poration in American and closing our discussion of the history of big 
business.



14.5  CONCLUSION



his chapter has sought to provide a broad outline for understanding some of the more impor- tant themes that 
contextualize the big business in American history. The history is expansive, and so we have held a fairly narrow view 
of the going concern in a limited period of American
history. The value in this approach, however,  has been to focus on a foundational period in American economic history, 
the 19th century, and explore how the interaction between corporations under the control of members of the business 
community and legal frameworks established a course of devel- opment in which big business becomes a normal feature of 
capitalism in the United States. By tracing the corporation from its roots in colonial Virginia to the landmark Sherman 
Act in 1890, we have taken care to view the firm as a vehicle for institutional change and the locus of cumulative 
causation. Therefore, we walk away from this reading of American economic history with the understanding that thinking 
about the firm as a site of institutional capacity facilitates a more dynamic understand- ing of economic development. 
We see that power, control and influence matter in formulating a rich understanding of why the United  States economy 
developed  as it did, rather  than following  some other technical possibility.






CHAPTER 15. COSTS AND PRICES: THE EVIDENCE




INTRODUCTION  TO  COSTS  AND  PRICES




























Figure 1. Ledger from a German general store, 1828. (Praefcke, Public Domain).


CHAPTER OBJECTIVES


Introduction to Prices and Costs
In this chapter, you will learn about:

•    Testing the Neoclassical Theory of the Firm
•    Costing and Pricing: A Heterodox Alternative
