


1.4  HOW  ECONOMIES  CAN  BE  ORGANIZED:  AN  OVERVIEW  OF ECONOMIC  SYSTEMS



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Contrast traditional economies, command economies, and market economies

•    Explain gross domestic product (GDP)

•    Assess the importance and effects of globalization



hink about what a complex system a modern economy is. It includes all production of goods and services, all buying and 
selling, all employment. The economic life of every individual is interrelated, at least to a small extent, with the 
economic lives of thousands or even millions of
other individuals.  Who organizes and coordinates this system? Who insures that, for example, the number of televisions 
a society provides is the same as the amount it needs and wants? Who insures that the right number of employees work in 
the electronics industry? Who insures that televisions are produced in the best way possible? How does it all get done?
There are at least three ways societies have found to organize an economy. The first is the traditional economy, which 
is the oldest economic system and can be found in parts of Asia, Africa, and South America. Traditional economies 
organize their economic affairs the way they have always done (i.e., tradition). Occupations stay in the family. Most 
families are farmers who grow the crops they have always  grown  using  traditional  methods.  What  you  produce  is  
what  you  get  to  consume.  Because things are driven by tradition, there is little economic progress or development.

Command economies are very different. In a command economy, economic effort is devoted to goals passed down from a 
ruler or ruling class. Ancient Egypt was a good example: a large part of economic life was devoted to building 
pyramids, like those shown in Figure 1, for the pharaohs. Medieval manor life is another example: the lord provided the 
land for growing crops and protection in the event of war. In return, vassals provided labor and soldiers to do the 
lord’s bidding. In the last century, com- munism emphasized command economies.

In a command economy, the government decides what goods and services will be produced and what prices will be charged 
for them. The government decides what methods of production will be used and how much workers will be paid. Many 
necessities like healthcare and education are provided for free. Currently, Cuba and North Korea have command 
economies.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                      19



















Figure 1. A Command Economy. Ancient Egypt was an example of a command economy. (Credit: Jay Bergesen/Flickr Creative 
Com- mons)














Figure   2.   A   Market   Economy. Nothing  says  “market”  more  than The  New  York  Stock  Exchange. (Credit:   
Erik   Drost/Flickr   Cre- ative Commons)

Although  command  economies  have  a  very  centralized  structure  for  economic  decisions,  market economies have a 
very decentralized structure. A market is an institution that brings together buyers and sellers of goods or services, 
who may be either individuals or businesses. The New York Stock Exchange, shown in Figure 2, is a prime example of 
market in which buyers and sellers are brought together. In a market economy, decision-making is decentralized. Market 
economies are based on private enterprise: the means of production (resources and businesses) are owned and operated by 
private individuals or groups of private individuals. Businesses supply goods and services based on demand. (In a 
command economy, by contrast, resources and businesses are owned by the govern- ment.) What goods and services  are 
supplied depends on what is demanded. A person’s income is based  on  his  or  her  ability  to  convert  resources  
(especially  labor)  into  something  that  society  val-

20                     ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


ues. The more society values the person’s output, the higher the income (think Lady Gaga or LeBron James). In this 
scenario, economic decisions are determined by market forces, not governments.

Most economies in the real world are mixed; they combine elements of command and market (and even  traditional)  
systems.  The  U.S.  economy  is  positioned  toward  the  market-oriented  end  of  the spectrum.  Many  countries  in 
 Europe  and  Latin  America,  while  primarily  market-oriented,  have  a greater degree of government involvement in 
economic decisions than does the U.S. economy. China and Russia, while they are closer to having a market-oriented 
system now than several decades ago, remain closer to the command economy end of the spectrum. A rich resource of 
information about countries and their economies can be found on the Heritage Foundation’s website, as the following 
Clear It Up feature discusses.


WHAT COUNTRIES ARE CONSIDERED ECONOMICALLY FREE?

Who is in control of economic decisions? Are people free to do what they want and to work where they want? Are busi- 
nesses free to produce when they want and what they choose, and to hire and fire as they wish? Are banks free to choose 
who will receive loans?  Or does the government  control these kinds of choices? Each year, researchers at the Heritage 
Foundation and the Wall Street Journal look at 50 different categories of economic freedom for countries around the 
world. They give each nation a score based on the extent of economic freedom in each category.
The 2015 Heritage Foundation’s Index of Economic Freedom report ranked 178 countries around the world: some exam- ples 
of the most free and the least free countries are listed in Table 1. Several countries were not ranked because of 
extreme instability that made judgments about economic freedom impossible. These countries include Afghanistan, Iraq, 
Syria, and Somalia.
The assigned rankings are inevitably based on estimates, yet even these rough measures can be useful for discerning 
trends. In 2015, 101 of the 178 included countries shifted toward greater economic freedom, although 77 of the 
countries shifted toward less economic freedom. In recent decades, the overall trend has been a higher level of 
economic freedom around the world.

Most Economic Freedom                                                                      Least Economic Freedom

1. Hong Kong                                                                                             167. 
Timor-Leste

2. Singapore                                                                                               168. 
Democratic Republic of Congo

3. New Zealand                                                                                         169. Argentina

4. Australia                                                                                                 170. 
Republic of Congo

5. Switzerland                                                                                            171. Iran

6. Canada                                                                                                    172. 
Turkmenistan

7. Chile                                                                                                        173. 
Equatorial Guinea

8. Estonia                                                                                                    174. 
Eritrea

9. Ireland                                                                                                     175. 
Zimbabwe

10. Mauritius                                                                                             176. 
Venezuela

11. Denmark                                                                                              177. Cuba

12. United States                                                                                       178. North 
Korea

Table 1. Economic Freedoms, 2015 (Source: The Heritage Foundation, 2015 Index of Economic Freedom, Country Rankings, 
http://www.heritage.org/index/ranking)

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                      21

REGULATIONS: THE RULES OF THE GAME

Markets and government regulations are always entangled. There is no such thing as an absolutely free market. 
Regulations always define the “rules of the game” in the economy. Economies that are primarily market-oriented have 
fewer regulations—ideally just enough to maintain an even playing field for participants. At a minimum, these laws 
govern matters like safeguarding private property against theft, protecting people from violence, enforcing legal 
contracts, preventing fraud, and col- lecting taxes. Conversely, even the most command-oriented economies operate using 
markets. How else would buying and selling occur? But the decisions of what will be produced and what prices will be 
charged are heavily regulated. Heavily regulated economies often have underground economies, which  are  markets  where 
 the  buyers  and  sellers  make  transactions  without  the  government’s approval.

The  question  of  how  to  organize  economic  institutions  is  typically  not  a  black-or-white  choice between all 
market or all government, but instead involves a balancing act over the appropriate com- bination of market freedom and 
government rules.

















Figure 3. Globalization. Cargo ships are one mode of transportation for  shipping  goods  in  the  global  economy.  
(Credit:  Raul  Valdez/ Flickr Creative Commons)

THE RISE OF GLOBALIZATION
Recent decades have seen a trend toward globalization, which is the expanding cultural, political, and economic 
connections between people around the world. One measure of this is the increased buying and selling of goods, 
services, and assets across national borders—in other words, international trade and financial capital flows.

Globalization  has  occurred  for  a  number  of  reasons.  Improvements  in  shipping,  as  illustrated  by the 
container ship shown in Figure 3, and air cargo have driven down transportation costs. Innova- tions in computing and 
telecommunications have made it easier and cheaper to manage long-distance economic connections of production and 
sales. Many valuable products and services in the modern economy can take the form of information—for example: computer 
software; financial advice; travel planning; music, books and movies; and blueprints for designing a building. These 
products and many

22                     ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


others can be transported over telephones and computer networks at ever-lower costs. Finally, inter- national 
agreements and treaties between countries have encouraged greater trade.

Table 2 presents one measure of globalization. It shows the percentage of domestic economic produc- tion that was 
exported for a selection of countries from 2010 to 2013, according to an entity known as The World Bank. Exports are 
the goods and services that are produced domestically and sold abroad. Imports are the goods and services that are 
produced abroad and then sold domestically. The size of total production in an economy is measured by the gross 
domestic product (GDP). Thus, the ratio of exports divided by GDP measures what share of a country’s total economic 
production is sold in other countries.
Country                                                    2010                     2011                     2012       
              2013
Higfter Income Countries
United States                                            12.4                      13.6                      13.6       
               13.5
Belgium                                                     76.2                      81.4                      82.2    
                  82.8
Canada                                                       29.1                      30.7                      30.0   
                   30.1
France                                                        26.0                      27.8                      28.1  
                    28.3
Middle Income Countries
Brazil                                                          10.9                      11.9                      
12.6                      12.6
Mexico                                                       29.9                      31.2                      32.6   
                   31.7
South Korea                                             49.4                      55.7                      56.3        
              53.9
Lower Income Countries
Chad                                                           36.8                      38.9                      36.9 
                     32.2
China                                                         29.4                      28.5                      27.3  
                    26.4
India                                                           22.0                      23.9                      
24.0                      24.8
Nigeria                                                      25.3                      31.3                      31.4   
                   18.0
Table 2. The Extent of Globalization (exports/GDP) (Source: http://databank.worldbank.org/data/)

In recent decades, the export/GDP ratio has generally risen, both worldwide and for the U.S. econ- omy.  Interestingly, 
 the  share  of  U.S.  exports  in  proportion  to  the  U.S.  economy  is  well  below  the global average, in part 
because large economies like the United States can contain more of the division of labor inside their national borders. 
However, smaller economies like Belgium, Korea, and Canada need to trade across their borders with other countries to 
take full advantage of division of labor, spe- cialization, and economies of scale. In this sense, the enormous U.S. 
economy is less affected by glob- alization than most other countries.

Table 2 also shows that many medium and low income countries around the world, like Mexico and China, have also 
experienced a surge of globalization in recent decades. If an astronaut in orbit could put on special glasses that make 
all economic transactions visible as brightly colored lines and look down at Earth, the astronaut would see the planet 
covered with connections.

So, hopefully, you now have an idea of what economics is about. Before you move to any other chapter of study, be sure 
to read the very important appendix to this chapter called The Use of Mathematics in Principles of Economics. It is 
essential that you learn more about how to read and use models in economics.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                      23





DECISIONS … DECISIONS IN THE SOCIAL MEDIA AGE

The world we live in today provides nearly instant access to a wealth of information. Consider that as recently as the 
late 1970s, the Farmer’s Almanac,  along with the Weather Bureau of the U.S. Department of Agriculture, were the 
primary sources  American  farmers  used  to  determine  when  to  plant  and  harvest  their  crops.  Today,  farmers  
are  more  likely  to access, online, weather forecasts from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration or 
watch the Weather Chan- nel. After all, knowing the upcoming forecast could drive when to harvest crops. Consequently, 
knowing the upcoming weather could change the amount of crop harvested.
Some relatively new information forums, such as Facebook, are rapidly changing how information is distributed; hence, 
influencing decision making. In 2014, the Pew Research Center reported that 71% of online adults use Facebook. Facebook 
post topics range from the National Basketball Association, to celebrity singers and performers, to farmers.
Information helps us make decisions. Decisions as simple as what to wear today to how many reporters should be sent to 
cover a crash. Each of these decisions is an economic decision. After all, resources are scarce. If ten reporters are 
sent to cover an accident, they are not available to cover other stories or complete other tasks. Information provides 
the knowl- edge needed to make the best possible decisions on how to utilize scarce resources. Welcome to the world of 
economics!


KEY CONCEPTS AND SUMMARY

Societies can be organized as traditional, command, or market-oriented economies. Most societies are a mix. The last 
few decades have seen globalization evolve as a result of growth in commercial and financial networks that cross 
national borders, making businesses and workers from different economies increasingly interdependent.

SELF-CHECK QUESTIONS


1.    The chapter defines private enterprise as a characteristic of market-oriented economies. What would public 
enterprise be? Hint: It is a characteristic of command economies.
2.    Why might Belgium, France, Italy, and Sweden have a higher export to GDP ratio than the United States?




REVIEW QUESTIONS



1.    What are the three ways that societies can organize themselves economically?
2.    What is globalization? How do you think it might have affected the economy over the past decade?




CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS



1.    Why do you think that most modern countries’ economies are a mix of command and market types?
2.    Can you think of ways that globalization has helped you economically? Can you think of ways that it has not?

24                     ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 

REFERENCES

The  Heritage  Foundation.  2015.  “2015  Index  of  Economic  Freedom.”  Accessed  March  11,  2015. 
http://www.heritage.org/index/ranking.

Garling, Caleb. “S.F. plane crash: Reporting, emotions on social media,” The San Francisco Chronicle. July      7,      
2013.      http://www.sfgate.com/news/article/S-F-plane-crash-Reporting-emotions-on- social-4651639.php.

Irvine, Jessica. “Social Networking Sites are Factories of Modern Ideas.” The Sydney Morning Herald. November   25,   
2011.http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/society-and-culture/social-network- 
ing-sites-are-factories-of-modern-ideas-20111124-1nwy3.html#ixzz2YZhPYeME.

Pew   Research   Center.   2015.   “Social   Networking   Fact   Sheet.”   Accessed   March   11,   2015. 
http://www.pewinternet.org/fact-sheets/social-networking-fact-sheet/.

The World Bank Group. 2015. “World Data Bank.” Accessed March 30, 2014. http://databank.world- bank.org/data/.

GLOSSARY
command economy an economy where economic decisions are passed down from government authority and where resources are 
owned by the government
exports products (goods and services) made domestically and sold abroad
globalization the trend in which buying and selling in markets have increasingly crossed national borders
gross domestic product (GDP) measure of the size of total production in an economy
imports products (goods and services) made abroad and then sold domestically
market interaction between potential buyers and sellers; a combination of demand and supply market economy an economy 
where economic decisions are decentralized, resources are owned by private individuals, and businesses supply goods and 
services based on demand
private enterprise system where the means of production (resources and businesses) are owned and operated by private 
individuals or groups of private individuals
traditional economy typically an agricultural economy where things are done the same as they have
always been done
underground economy a market where the buyers and sellers make transactions in violation of one or more government 
regulations

SOLUTIONS


Answers to Self-Cfteck Questions

1.    Public enterprise means the factors of production (resources and businesses) are owned and operated by the 
government.
2.    The United States is a large country economically speaking, so it has less need to trade internationally than the 
other countries mentioned. (This is the same reason that France and Italy have lower ratios than

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                      25
Belgium or Sweden.) One additional reason is that each of the other countries is a member of the European Union, where 
trade between members occurs without barriers to trade, like tariffs and quotas.


