


15.1  TESTING  THE  NEOCLASSICAL  THEORY  OF  THE  FIRM



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Construct testable hypotheses from the neoclassical theory of the firm

•    Test these hypotheses against the given data



et’s review the basic properties of the neoclassical theory of the firm as given in previous chap- ters  (“Cost  and  
Industry  Structure,”  “Perfect  Competition,”  and  “Monopoly”).  To  keep  things simple, we’ll focus on the short 
run behavior of a single firm, and we’ll look to the similarities of
this behavior regardless of whether the market is competitive or monopolistic.  First, the firm is por- trayed  as  a  
functional  relationship  between  inputs  (factors)  and  outputs  (products).   Because  we’re considering the short 
run, there are variable and fixed inputs, and therefore variable and fixed costs.

Second, the firm accepts the demand for its product as given and determines how much it should produce–its quantity of 
output (Q)–so that its profits are maximized where the cost of producing the last unit equals the revenue from selling 
it–that is, where marginal cost (MC) equals marginal revenue (MR).  We assume that the firm is subject to diminishing 
marginal returns.  Therefore marginal costs will always eventually rise to meet marginal revenue and will cause average 
total cost (ATC) to even- tually rise (giving it its ‘U’ shape).  Hence, the very simple Hypotftesis 1: over some 
short-run period, managers are aware of their firms’ marginal costs associated with increasing (or decreasing) their 
pro- duction, and they generally find that marginal cost increases over a relevant range of production.

Now, consider the conditions presented in the chapters “Cost and Industry Structure” and “Perfect Competition”:

1.   If MC < ATC, then ATC is decreasing (marginal cost is ‘dragging down’ average total cost the same way a low test 
score would drag down your course grade).  Therefore, if ATC is decreasing, it must be the case that MC < ATC.
2.   Profits = Q(P-ATC), where P represents price.  Therefore, firms make losses when P < ATC, break even when P = ATC, 
and make profits when P > ATC.
3.   Profit maximizing firms under perfect competition produce where MC = MR = P.

We can read these three conditions in reverse to establish a necessary condition for firms to avoid making a loss.  
Plugging (3) into (2), it should be clear that, since the firm will produce where P = MC, the profit equation can be 
restated as Profits = Q(MC – ATC) under perfect competition.  Hence, if the firm is going to break even or make a 
profit then MC must be ≥  ATC.  Taking this back to (1),

418                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


then, for MC to be equal to or greater than ATC, ATC must either be constant or increasing at some reasonable level of 
output.

Hence, Hypotftesis 2: if firms maximize profits by producing a quantity where marginal cost equals marginal revenue, 
then under competitive conditions firms must normally be producing in a situation in which average total cost is either 
constant or increasing.  Really, this is just an extension of hypoth- esis one which allows us to test our theory by 
looking at average total costs rather than marginal costs.

TESTING THE THEORY

It  is  generally  held  that  a  developed  science  should  be  capable  of  expressing  ideas  about  how  the world 
works in hypotheses, and that these hypotheses should be compared with actual observations to determine how well the 
theory explains what we see in the real world.  Fortunately (and perhaps surprisingly), a considerable number of 
studies on both costs and prices have been produced going back over 100 years.  Saving the reader a laborious trek 
through all of them, we’ll just look at a couple to test the validity of our hypotheses.

In 1998 Alan Blinder and colleagues published a book, Asking About Prices, which was not actually concerned  with  
microeconomics  (it  was  concerned  with  testing  theories  of  macroeconomic  price ‘stickiness’),  but  just  the  
same  can  help  us  test  our  hypotheses  [1].   Their  approach  was  somewhat uncommon to mainstream economics at 
the end of the 20th century: they simply asked business peo- ple about how they did things.  For our purposes, their 
work (see p. 103) sheds light on hypothesis 1. Asking business executives about the shape of their marginal cost curve 
was apparently a bit tricky. Evidently,  most  do  not  normally  consider  the  concept  of  marginal  cost,  so  the  
surveyors  had  to repeat, rephrase, and further explain the question before a response could be given.

And the responses were not encouraging for the neoclassical theory of the firm.  Firms representing only 11% of GDP 
were believed to have upward sloping marginal costs curves.  Nearly half reported constant marginal costs, and, almost 
shockingly, 41% reported decreasing marginal costs (suggesting increasing returns).  Evidently, the ‘law’ of 
diminishing marginal returns is more like a local custom, appropriate to only a small part (about 11%) of the US 
economy.

In fact, similar findings had been reported over 50 years ago.  In an article published in the American Economic Review 
in 1952, Wilford Eitemen and Glenn Guthrie reported their findings from a survey of manufacturing companies across the 
US.  Specifically, they found that only 5% of the goods pro- duced conformed to the standard ‘U’-shaped depiction of 
average total costs.  The majority (60%) of products were reported as having average total cost curves which simply 
declined as output increased up to maximum capacity.  (Almost all remaining products were reported as similar but with 
a slight rise in average total costs just before capacity was reached.)

DESIGNING THE AVERAGE TOTAL COST CURVE

Eitemen offered a simple, intuitive reason why we should expect that most average total cost curves would always 
decline with increased output.  One way to look at the matter is in terms of the per- centage of designed maximum 
capacity output at which you would want your production process to operate most efficiently.  To give an example, 
imagine you’re an engineer and you have been tasked with designing a machine (or a factory, or the layout of an office) 
that can produce some maximum number of units in a given day.  In designing the machine, you find that it will have to 
operate more

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   419

or less efficiently depending on how heavily it’s being used.  Would you design it to operate most effi- ciently when 
it’s only running at 20% capacity?  Maybe 60%?  Perhaps 99%?

Most would say that a production process should work best when it’s operating somewhere near the level of output it was 
designed to be capable of producing–otherwise, why should it be made to pro- duce so much  output in the first  place?  
Translate  ‘work best’  into  ‘operate  at lowest  average  total cost’ and the implication should be clear: a 
‘U’-shaped average total cost curve indicates a production process that was designed to be capable of producing up to 
some maximum amount inefficiently.  In contrast, a declining average total cost curve indicates that the production 
process was made to work best when it’s producing as much as it was designed to be capable of producing–the most 
efficient, lowest average total cost point being at or near 100% of maximum capacity output.

Returning to the three postulates we used to develop hypothesis 2, Eitemen and Guthrie’s findings indicate a clear 
departure from the standard model of firm behavior.  If most firms believe their aver- age total costs decline as 
output increases, then mathematically their marginal cost curves must be below (‘dragging down’) their average total 
costs.  (Perhaps in many cases, the firm’s marginal costs are constant as Blinder et al. indicate is common throughout 
the economy.) Now, if marginal costs are always less than average total costs, then there are only two possible 
conclusions to be drawn:

1.   Firms produce a quantity where MC = MR.  But, since MC is always < ATC, and under perfect competition profits = 
Q(MC-ATC), then firms in perfectly competitive markets will always make a loss.  This doesn’t seem like an attractive 
conclusion–surely we can find firms in competitive markets that manage to make a profit.  So it’s worth considering the 
alternative:
2.   Firms do not produce a quantity where MC = MR.  That is, under the cost structure that most firms report, the 
standard profit maximization behavior postulated in the neoclassical theory of the firm is not only unrealistic, it’s 
impossible.

Clearly, the implications of these findings do not bode well for the neoclassical theory of the firm presented in 
earlier chapters.  The preponderance of evidence may not wholly refute the neoclassical model, but it does expose 
severe limitations. In the breakout box below, two additional hypotheses are examined, giving greater reason to abandon 
the neoclassical theory of the firm.  The section that follows then introduces a few basic concepts from an 
alternative, heterodox viewpoint.


TWO MORE HYPOTHESES

From the neoclassical perspective, we can imagine a firm incrementally increasing its, say, weekly output, and 
continuing to do so as long as its marginal revenue is greater than its marginal cost.  Once the additional revenue of 
one additional unit of output just covers the cost of that unit’s production, the firm settles on that level of 
output–profit maximizing equi- librium has been reached where MC = MR.  Assuming that marginal cost must be positive 
(most workers won’t pay their boss to let them work more hours, but perhaps there are exceptions), then marginal 
revenue must also be positive.

Now, refer back to chapter “Elasticity,” specifically the section asking “Does Raising Price Bring in More Revenue.”  
There you learned that a firm that is able to set its own price can increase revenues by cutting prices if demand is 
elastic.  If on the other hand demand is inelastic, cutting your price will increase your sales (that’s the law of 
demand after all), but the lower price will weigh heavier on your revenues than the gained sales, and your revenues 
will actually decline.  Mathematically, this works out to a simple rule: if demand is elastic then selling more will 
increase revenues–which is to say that marginal

420                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 



revenue is positive when the elasticity of demand > 1 (and MR is zero when the elasticity of demand = 1, and negative 
when elasticity of demand is < 1).  Hence, ftypotftesis 3: If firms produce where MC = MR, then MR must be positive, 
and there- fore demand must be elastic.

Blinder et al. (1998 p. 99) found some support for this–but not much.  While noting many businesses do not actually 
calcu- late or even think along these lines, the authors found that, among those that could give an answer, 84% 
believed demand to be inelastic (and, by implication, negative revenues).  In fact, 41% believed that the elasticity of 
demand was zero–that is, a price cut would not increase sales at all.

Now consider a more general issue.  In chapter “Supply and Demand” you were introduced to the centerpiece of neoclassi- 
cal economics: the market model. The chief argument of that model is that prices in the market will adjust to bring 
supply and demand into an equilibrium  in which the quantity  people wish to sell is equal to the quantity  people wish 
to pur- chase–that is, the price mechanism acts to clear markets.  This model fits into the broader narrative of 
neoclassical thought which holds that capitalist economies are organized by price adjustments in the complex network of 
markets that make up these economies.  Therefore, Hypotftesis 4: unless the world changes very seldom or very slowly, 
leaving most markets in their previously established equilibria for long stretches of time, prices should be changing 
rapidly with frequent bidding, as in an auction market.




















Figure  2  –  Left:  Auctioneer  does  brisk  business  at  the  Hickman  Saturday  Auction,  15  miles  south  of  
Lincoln,  NE.  (O’Rear,  Public Domain). Right: Stock brokers on the New York Stock Exchange, 1963. (US News & World 
Report, Public Domain). Price bidding is essential to auction markets like the ones depicted above. But, of the things 
you’ve purchased in the last month, for how many of them did you bid–or even negotiate–a price?


By now you could probably predict what the evidence was going to tell us about this important part of standard 
neoclassical theory: throughout most of the modern US economy, prices change relatively infrequently.  Blinder et al. 
(1998, p. 84) find that 49% of responding firms change their prices no more than once in a year or even longer.  
Indeed, only 22% reprice daily, weekly, or monthly.  The auction market model at the core of neoclassical economics 
exists, indeed; but, it would appear that it lies somewhere between minor and insignificant in today’s economy.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   421
The evidence reviewed above suggests that basic ideas from neoclassical microeconomics about how businesses, markets, 
and capitalist economies function have, at best, very limited application to the real world.  While the evidence 
doesn’t necessarily deliver a fatal blow to the neoclassical theory of the firm, it should be disconcerting to find so 
many businesses viewing their world and their work in a fundamentally contradictory way.  Likewise, the prevalence of 
yearly price changes doesn’t invalidate the auction model of markets you learned in an earlier chapter; but it does 
raise questions as to its usefulness, and to whether an alternative model should take priority in our understanding of 
modern capitalist economies.



15.2  COSTING  AND  PRICING:  A  HETERODOX  ALTERNATIVE



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Explain the concepts of costing, depreciation, going concerns, and pricing

•    Identify the basic pricing methods of full cost pricing and target rate of return pricing

•    Calculate prices according to these methods

•    Discuss the implications of planning, costing, and pricing for the existence of a supply curve



he empirical findings presented in the previous section suggest that our standard models of how firms  behave  and  
what  determines  prices  are  not  appropriate  for  understanding  today’s economies.  Choosing the profit maximizing 
level of output does not appear to be relevant to
firm behavior in the short run.  Likewise, frequent price adjustments ‘in the market’ are not charac- teristic of most 
real-world markets, in which prices are clearly determined by producers and main- tained  over  relatively  long  
periods  of  time.   All  of  this  suggests  that  a  deeper  look  into  the  actual nature of firms’ costs and the 
actual manner in which prices are determined is necessary.  Fortunately, ample  information  about  these  processes  
is  available,  and  it  comes  from  the  costing  practices  of accountants and the pricing practices of management.
Costing  is  the  process  of  estimating  the  costs  of  production  before  production  actually  takes place–and,  
hence,  before  the  actual  costs  of  production  are  known  with  certainty.   To  do  this,  of course, it would 
be necessary to have some idea of how much output the business will be producing and the direct and indirect expenses 
that will be involved at that level of production.  Making such calculations may involve a simple, educated guess or a 
sophisticated process of research, experiment, and forecast.  What is important, from a theoretical standpoint, is that 
it is a fundamentally uncertain task which takes place before exchanges occur in the market.  This view is consistent 
with what was suggested above, that firms plan their production processes before, a topic discussed further in chap- 
ter “The Megacorp.”

DEPRECIATION AND THE GOING CONCERN

A complete review of cost accounting isn’t necessary here, but one particular type of cost, deprecia- tion, is of 
particular historical and conceptual significance.  Depreciation is a way of accounting for the expense of an 
asset–say, a machine press–over the life of the asset.  For instance, suppose your machine shop purchases a press (a 
machine that does exactly what it sounds like it does) for $20,000.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   423

If you expect that the press will be in use for the next 10 years you might account for a depreciation expense of 
$2,000 per year for the next decade.

To understand the significance of depreciation, consider how businesses usually calculated income before the late 
1800s.  Before then, business enterprise was often treated as a terminal venture, having a clearly defined beginning 
and end date.  Investors would pool money to start a business, purchase materials and capital (say, a ship and local 
goods to be traded abroad), and hire workers (the ship’s crew).  At some predetermined date (perhaps when the ship 
returned to port) the business would be liquidated: its crew would be paid and any remaining assets would be sold off.  
The resulting profit to the investors would, in essence, simply be whatever money was leftover.  In this approach, what 
was the relationship between the productive asset (the ship) and profit?

Profits were simply decreased by the cost of the ship, but increased by whatever price could be fetched by selling the 
ship at the end of the venture.

But, accountants in the late 1800s asked, is that an appropriate way to think of, say, a railroad com- pany?  Will a 
railroad lay thousands of miles of line, run trains across it for some predetermined num- ber of years, and then pull 
up the line to be sold for scrap metal?  Clearly not.  Instead, fixed assets like a railroad’s line, or an airline’s 
planes, or a law firm’s office building are depreciated over the course of their useful life.  Conceptually, this is 
simply the recognition of the role those assets play in allowing these businesses to generate an income into the 
foreseeable future.  Most importantly, this account- ing method reflects the fact that these businesses are not treated 
as terminal ventures.  Rather, they, as nearly all businesses today, are considered going concerns: organizations which 
are expected to continue to exist into the foreseeable future.

PRICES FROM PRICING

Similar to costing, pricing refers to procedures businesses use to determine, beforehand, the price at which they will 
sell their product once production is up and running and sales can be made.  While modern  pricing  procedures  can  be 
 complex  and  will  vary  widely  across  different  businesses  and industries, two basic methods should be 
understood: full cost pricing and target rate of return pricing. Both are instances of markup (or cost-plus) pricing: 
setting the price of a business enterprise’s prod- uct by adding some dollar amount over and above average costs of 
production.
Full cost pricing (sometimes called normal cost pricing) is the simpler of the two methods.  It can be written as



Where:

P is the price at which the business plans to sell its product

ATC is the average total (or per-unit) cost determined in the costing process r is the predetermined markup
Target rate of return pricing is similar, but a bit more complicated.  Here the price is being set, not to

424                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


achieve a particular percentage profit above costs, but to earn a desired return on the money invested into the 
business.  The formula can be written as



Where:

ROI is desired return on invested capital

IC is invested capital–that is, money invested into producing the product Q is the expected quantity of output sold

CALCULATING PRICES

To illustrate both approaches, consider a business that invests $10 million into a plant designed to manufacture 
inexpensive steak knives.  It expects that over some relevant period it will be able to produce and sell 2 million 
knives; and, at that level of production, its per-unit costs will be $1.80 per knife.  The calculated prices using our 
two pricing procedures are given below (assuming that in the first case the desired markup is 10% (or 0.1), and in the 
second the desired return on invested capital is also 10%).

Full cost price:


Target rate of return price:

Notice also that, even though the markup and desired return on invested capital are both 0.1 (10%), the resulting 
markups and hence the prices are not the same.  This is because, although both procedures are essentially marking the 
price up over costs, the treatment of the costs being marked up are different.

It is worth reflecting on the significance of these insights into cost accounting and markup pricing, as they represent 
important general concepts in heterodox economics which are usually neglected in standard neoclassical theory.    
First, they suggest that business enterprises are making decisions before anything is even produced, let alone ‘brought 
to market’.  In particular, pricing practices (and the intended quantity of output and corresponding cost estimates on 
which pricing is based) are a component of the planning process which takes place within the business enterprise.  
Contrary to the axiom that firms cannot recover fixed costs in the short run and therefore should ignore them in mak- 
ing short run decisions, it is long run planning driving short run behavior that is most important for understanding 
what determines prices.

Second, to acknowledge costing and pricing as it actually occurs is to acknowledge that the future is fundamentally 
unknowable.  While standard (neoclassical) models assume that firms know their pro- duction costs and, typically, also 
the amount they can sell and the resulting revenues they can expect to take in, actual firms face uncertainty in how 
their plans will work out.  A particular implication of this reality: since firms set prices based on estimated average 
total costs at an expected level of output, a change in the actual quantity of production/sales is unlikely to affect 
the predetermined price.  This

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   425

suggests that price and quantity supplied are determined completely separately, which in turn means that there is no 
such thing as a supply curve.


THE ILLUSORY SUPPLY CURVE

Recall from the basics of the neoclassical market model that a supply schedule (and its corresponding supply curve) 
simply shows the relationship between how much a firm (or firms) would be willing to supply at various market prices.  
That is, supply simply refers to the functional relationship between quantity supplied and the market price, with the 
market price determining the quantity supplied.  If, however, the two are determined separately then there’s no way 
around the impli- cation: quantity supplied is not functionally related to the market price–that is, there is no supply 
curve.

The astute reader may have already realized the impossibility of supply curves under certain conditions from the failed 
hypotheses discussed earlier in this chapter.  Referring back to chapter “Perfect Competition,” specifically the 
section titled “Marginal Cost and the Firm’s Supply Curve,” you’ll recall that a firm’s marginal cost curve (above 
minimum average vari- able cost) is its supply curve.  (This is because quantity supplied is determined where MC = MR 
and, under competitive conditions, MR = P.  Hence, quantity supplied is determined by P = MC.)  Now, as was shown with 
the test of hypothesis 2 above, firms simply couldn’t determine their quantity supplied this way–at least not under 
competitive conditions and having the empirically typical average total cost curves. This, of course, means that the 
neoclassical theory of supply must be rejected for these cases.

This doesn’t mean that the basic ideas of supply–higher prices leading to higher output and vice versa, for 
instance–are completely absent in the real world.  Some industries–particularly, those related to mining and 
agriculture–do in fact see diminishing  returns.   In  these  (albeit  limited)  parts  of  modern  economies  
upward-sloping  supply  curves  may  be  found. However, as our examination of the cost structures of actual firms 
suggested earlier in this chapter, this relegates what is considered the normal case in neoclassical economics to a 
special–and pretty rare–case.

Third and finally, a review of the evidence and history of actual businesses reveals an anachronism within the 
neoclassical theory of the firm.  As you learned in chapter “Perfect Competition,” the firm chooses the most profitable 
line of business (and appropriate production technique) in the long run, and the profit maximizing quantity to produce 
in the short run.  If, in the short run, the firm is making a loss it will choose to shut down (if its fixed cost 
losses would be lower than the losses on continu- ing production).  In an abstract, but important way the business 
enterprise this theory is describing is a terminal venture.  Yet, beyond the halls and offices of economics 
departments, firms are generally seen as going concerns.  This is reflected, for instance, in the accounting practices 
discussed above, as well as in the relationships firms maintain with customers.  Blinder et al. (1998, pp. 96-7) found 
that 85% of all sales in the economy are made to regular customers whom the business expects to sell to in the future.  
In manufacturing and wholesale trade that number is over 90%.

As will be explored in more depth in the chapter “The Megacorp,” the idea that businesses are orga- nized and run as 
going concerns is a significant theoretical innovation over the standard neoclassical theory of the firm.   For now, we 
only need to consider what it means for prices.  The role of the price mechanism–the ‘invisible hand of the market’–in 
neoclassical economics cannot be overstated.  It is the process by which self-interested people (consumers, workers, 
entrepreneurs, landlords, and all the rest) are brought together in exchange for their mutual benefit.  It is the 
mechanism that allows econ- omists to believe in a (potentially) optimal equilibrium state–in an individual market, and 
in a capital- ist economy as a whole.

426                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


In contrast, what is being argued in this section is that prices–at least those prices not actually deter- mined 
through an auction–are set by businesses themselves as part of their planning process.  The reader may have noticed 
that in the markup pricing introduced above a glaring question was ignored: namely, what determines the markup?  A 
succinct, if incomplete answer can now be given: if the firm is to be a going concern, the markup, as well as the 
procedures that determined costs, will reflect the needs of the firm to continue to do business into the foreseeable 
future.  For most firms there will also be plans to grow.  Hence, from this view, prices are not exchange-based, market 
clearing values at all.  They are, rather, reproduction prices–allowing the firm to reproduce itself through time–and, 
typically, also growth prices–ensuring the firm brings in the earnings necessary to expand.  To use a now-familiar 
term, the vast majority of the prices we see in actual capitalist economies today might best be called going concern 
prices.
