


15.3  COMPARING  NEOCLASSICAL  AND  HETERODOX  THEORY



or quick reference, a table contrasting general views from neoclassical and heterodox econom- ics on firms, costs, and 
prices is provided below.  The student should be aware that we are paint- ing  in  broad  strokes  here.   Both  
neoclassical  and  heterodox  economics  include  a  variety  of
sophisticated models and theories, some of which would contradict the characterizations made below. However, as an 
introduction to microeconomics this table should suffice as a reflection of the core positions and standard ideas 
within these two camps.




Prices are determined in…
Neoclassical                                      Heterodox

the market                                                       the planning processes of the business enterprise
Prices function to…           clear markets                                                  ensure the reproduction 
and growth of business enterprises


As production increases, average total costs…



Marginal costs…



Price and quantity supplied…

first decline to some minimum (or efficient) point and then start to rise again (that is, ATC is ‘U’-shaped)

eventually rise with higher levels of production due to the law of diminishing returns

are functionally related–that is, when price changes quantity will generally change

typically decline up to (or very near) the maximum output at which the production process was designed to operate
are not generally contemplated by business executives and are not relevant to microeconomic theory, in part because 
firms don’t (and couldn’t) typically produce according marginal costs and revenues.

are, in most instances, determined completely separately

Firms are viewed as…        terminal ventures, always and
everywhere maximizing profits
going concerns, organized and operated to (try to) stay in business into the foreseeable future


Firms make sftort-run decisions…

ignoring fixed costs, because by definition these cannot be changed
typically in accordance with the long-run strategies determined through their long-run planning process






CHAPTER 16. THE MEGACORP




INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  MEGACORP
































Figure 1. The power of the Standard Oil trust. Udo Keppler’s political cartoon depicting the corporation which, circa 
1900, had effectively monopolized petroleum distribution. The tentacles of this gargantuan octopus rep- resented the 
power Standard Oil exercised over other industries (copper, steel, and shipping) as well as politics. (Wikimedia, 
Public Domain)


CHAPTER OBJECTIVES


Introduction
In this chapter, you will learn about:

•    The imperatives of technology
•    Business models, plural: Aims and methods of the megacorp
•    Stabilizing unstable markets

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   431



•    A case in point: The high prices of college textbooks



he importance of businesses in modern capitalist economies cannot be overstated.  They are the local barber shops and 
factories, as well as the multinational oil giants and online retail enter- prises. We do business with them when we 
purchase nearly everything we buy as well as when
we set out to earn a living.  While economists prefer simply to say ‘firm’, everyday conversations will often include 
terms like ‘big business’, ‘corporations’, ‘entrepreneurs’, and ‘job creators’.  They may ref- erence  particular  
firms,  known  by  name  to  everyone,  or  commonly  understood  terms  for  whole industries–for instance, ‘the 
media’ or ‘Wall Street’.  Certainly, businesses are an important and com- plex  part  of  the  modern  world–not  just  
the  economy,  but  society  more  broadly.   They  have  been applauded  and  derided,  praised  and  demonized  since 
 before  the  Sons  of  Liberty  cast  crates  of  tea belonging to the East India Company, a large British 
corporation, into Boston Harbor in 1773.























Figure 2. “Boston Tea Party,” by W.D. Cooper, The History of North America. London: E. Newbury, 1789. Engraving. Plate 
opposite p. 58. Rare Book and Special Collections Division, Library of Congress (40). (Wiki- media, Public Domain)

Yet, neoclassical economics treats ‘the firm’ with typical abstraction: it is simply a production func- tion, 
translated into a set of cost curves, with a singular objective to maximize profits.  That model of the firm, almost 
regardless of the actual business or businesses it might represent, has a ‘U’-shaped average total cost curve, and 
increasing marginal costs due to diminishing marginal returns (see chap- ter “Cost and Industry Structure”).  It 
pursues, always and everywhere, the greatest possible profits by deciding what, how, and how much to produce, taking 
technological possibilities as given.  As you

432                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 

have  seen  in  previous  chapters,  the  market  structure–and  therefore  the  outcome–may  differ  from industry to 
industry, location to location, and so forth, but the firm remains essentially the same.

Many heterodox economists will note that abstraction is not, in itself, a bad thing.  A complex reality has to be 
simplified in our understanding of it, if we have any hope of understanding it at all.  But, it is important to get it 
right–to simplify reality without departing too far from it.  The neoclassical depiction of the firm is not only 
fundamentally problematic, heterodox economists would argue (see chapter “Costs and Prices: The Evidence”), it is part 
of a view of capitalism that may no longer be appropriate to our modern economy.  Specifically, the plot of the 
mainstream economics narrative casts the market as the star of the show–and, at least where that market is competitive, 
really con- sumers play the roles of king and queen.  In contrast, heterodox economists tell a story in which mod- ern 
capitalist economies have largely replaced consumer sovereignty with producer sovereignty.

In  this  alternative  story,  the  true  importance  of  the  producer–specifically  the  large,  economically, 
politically, and culturally influential corporation–is acknowledged.  The business enterprise (a term many heterodox 
economists prefer to ‘firm’) is a socially recognized, legitimate organization.  It has certain requirements if it is 
to be maintained as a coherent organization.  And, especially in its ‘big business’ form–what Post Keynesian economist 
Alfred Eichner termed the Megacorp–those require- ments take priority in the way modern capitalist economies are 
structured.


DOES MONOPOLY POWER CAPTURE THE REAL BREADTH OF CORPORATE POWER?

The starting point and focus of most of neoclassical theory has traditionally been voluntary exchange in a competitive 
mar- ket–that is, individuals choosing to trade one good for another, and in doing so making each other better off.  
This has colored the notion of power within this paradigm, limiting it somewhat to a failure to meet the standards of 
the compet- itive ideal.  Such a narrow treatment of power, in the realm of big business, is evident in the monopoly 
model presented in a previous chapter.  There, the reader will notice, the notion of power is explicitly treated; but 
the focus is on the abil- ity to raise prices and restrict output compared to the outcome that would exist under 
perfect competition.  Treatment of barriers to entry is secondary, showing the practical means by which business 
enterprises may achieve higher prices through lower competition.  (Likewise, monopolistic competition and oligopoly are 
typically defined as some mix of the two extremes of perfect competition and monopoly, rather than fundamentally 
different situations.)  The quantity, more- over, is still determined by a comparison of marginal costs and revenues, 
and price is still set with reference to demand–the same basic tenets of the model of perfect competition remain in 
tact.
Yet, consider the forms of power which the neoclassical abstraction sets aside.  The power to dictate both prices and 
quan- tities, for instance through the billions of dollars of advertising spent each year in the US, is ignored–or, at 
best, treated as a special case.  So, too, is the power to create new technologies, as well as to limit access to those 
technologies through things like digital rights management.  Likewise, the political and cultural influences of 
business are almost completely neglected in an analysis that focuses only on prices and quantities.

If the reader is willing to accept this alternative story, setting big business at the center of the eco- nomic 
landscape, as a plausible way to look at how our economy works, a host of new questions–and new answers–will open up.  
The following sections will explore some of those questions while intro- ducing a number of important concepts and 
theories from heterodox economics.  To illustrate these ideas, the chapter will conclude with a look at the college 
textbook industry and a question you’ve probably asked yourself: why do textbooks costs so much?
