


16.1  THE  IMPERATIVES  OF  TECHNOLOGY



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Identify the important consequences of technological change for the organization of business

•    Explain the implications for the relationship between business enterprises and market structure



n chapter “Costs and Prices” you learned (or will learn) that modern businesses are treated as going concerns–that is, 
organizations which are expected to continue to exist into the foreseeable future. This idea, reflected in accounting 
practices developed in the second half of the 19th century, is central to how heterodox economists understand the 
nature of the modern business enterprise.  Its historical roots are explored in more detail in chapter “The Rise of the 
Big Business,” but here we want
to focus on a particular cause, technological advance, and its implications.

In his classic, The New Industrial State (1967), economist John Kenneth Galbraith compared the Ford Motor Company in 
the year of its founding, 1903, to the same business at the introduction of the first Mustang in 1964.  In 1903 the 
company employed around 125 people, worked with approximately
$150,000 in capital, and required only months of negotiations, preparation, and production to bring an automobile to 
the market.  It would be an understatement to say that, six decades later, the process was more involved.  The Mustang 
was the result of several years of preparation, millions of dollars on engineering and ‘styling’, and tens of millions 
on tooling for production.  At the time, Ford employed over 300,000 people.

Galbraith argued that the essential cause of this massive increase in preparation, capital, and labor was the 
tremendous advance in tecftnology (which he defined as “the application of scientific or other organized knowledge to 
practical tasks”).  Increasingly sophisticated technology requires specializa- tion–of machinery and the materials it 
will work on, as well as of workers.  All of which, of course, requires more capital (that is, money).  It also means 
that increasingly specialized workers, machines, and  so  on  must  be  more  carefully  managed;  and  that  a  
commitment  to  produce  something  must be made much further in advance of actually having something to sell.  As 
Galbraith explained, the Dodge brothers’ machine shop, responsible for machining the engine and chassis of the original 
Ford automobiles, could have hypothetically been asked to accommodate significant changes in the car’s design with only 
a few hours delay.  The factories which built the Mustang, on the other hand, were effectively locked into making 
Mustangs for well over a year.
Finally, and most importantly, there is the technological imperative of planning.  As Galbraith argued, the large 
financial and material commitments necessary to design a product and prepare for its pro-

434                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 
































Figure 3. A 1964 Ford Mustang in Wimbledon White, photographed at the 50th anniversary of the Mustang at the Charlotte 
Motor Speedway. (Source: Sicnag, Wikimedia, CC-BY-2.0)

duction require that each part of the process works today so that, in the distant future, when all the parts are 
brought together, the job is done correctly.  This means that the business  enterprise  will require specialists in 
predicting (and shaping) future market conditions, specialists in materials acqui- sition, specialists in education to 
ensure a competent workforce, and so on–all to ensure that what the organization set out to do some months or years or 
decades earlier actually gets done and, with some luck, proves successful.  Without that capacity, the confidence to 
set out on such a sophisticated enterprise would never have existed in the first place.

What bearing, then, does this have on our theories of how businesses behave and how markets oper- ate?  We’ll start 
with the  general points: first, the small firm of the perfect competition model will not do in an age of increasingly 
sophisticated technology.  Both the complexity of specialized knowl- edge and its management through a large 
organization suggest that a large business enterprise will be the norm.  Second, that complexity of knowledge and 
organization suggests that the modern busi- ness enterprise ought to be considered in more dimensions that simply its 
cost curves and a goal of maximizing profits.  The politics and culture of organization become relevant to 
understanding what Galbraith called the tecftnostructure–that is, the whole of those people who participate in the 
group decision-making that directs the business enterprise through time.

viewpoint.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   435





DOES THE INTERNET MOVE US CLOSER TO PERFECT COMPETITION?

A common refrain in recent years argues that information technology–in particular, the internet–contradicts the 
tendency toward big business.  Recall that the model of perfect competition doesn’t suggest that firms must be 
absolutely tiny–say, having no more than a handful of employees.  Rather, it simply considers situations in which firms 
are small relative to the size of the market.  Many have argued that the internet has made global markets out of local 
markets; and, as a result, firms that used to be considered large are now small relative to the whole world of 
competitors.
Yet, within the tech sector, as in most other industries, concentration and big business appear to be the norm.  Large 
busi- ness like IBM have long dominated traditional computing, before the World Wide Web, and relatively newer firms 
like Google and Facebook continue to expand control over much of the newer, web-based markets.  Of course, Amazon, Pay- 
pal, eBay, AirBnB, and Uber have allowed for a proliferation of small merchants, taxi drivers, and hotels; but with 
these large corporations looming over the markets they’ve created, have we really returned to the traditional 
competitive prod- uct markets of past centuries–or are we looking at the competitive (one might say, ‘divide and 
conquer’) labor markets that characterized the rise of big business in the late 1800’s?

Third, if planning is the central concern of the modern business enterprise, then we have to recon- sider how we see 
firms relating to their markets.  In previous chapters, you have studied the basic neoclassical models of market 
structure and how firms respond to particular market conditions.  The implicit assumption in these models is that firms 
react to markets.  Yet, if long term planning is to be done effectively it would seem obvious that businesses cannot 
take the markets as given and respond accordingly.  Instead, they will have to actively shape those markets to ensure 
stable, predictable con- ditions into the future.

This third point has a particular bearing on our theories of prices and competition.  History shows that businesses 
often try to avoid competition in terms of price.  You can probably imagine why this is, given the complexity of modern 
technologies and the magnitude of investments necessary to get a business off the ground.  Where starting a new 
business or a new product line for an existing busi- ness requires huge sums of money and years of planning, it is 
simply a must that the investors and management are reasonably sure that it will be able to sell the product profitably 
in the relatively dis- tant future.  The business enterprise’s problem in this scenario is that competitors may be 
making the same investments; and, in an attempt to make sure those investments don’t go to waste due to weak sales, 
they may try to grab market share by lowering their prices.  If everyone in the market pursues the same strategy, what 
do you think the result would be?

Stiff competition based on prices is relatively rare in established markets for a simple reason: it tends to be 
mutually destructive to most or all competitors who engage in it.  In fact, when prominent busi- nesses engage in that 
sort of scenario–as, for instance, the fast food giants occasionally have in recent years–it is often considered 
newsworthy, usually showing up in the headlines of the business press as a ‘price war’.  A century ago, the term ‘cut 
throat competition,’ which includes aggressive price cuts and other efforts to drive competitors out of the market, was 
common.  Clearly, both of the terms suggest that price competition can be a violent thing–something, one would hope at 
least, that should be avoided if at all possible.

In summary, then, heterodox economists typically see the modern business enterprise as a going con- cern, engaged in 
long term planning which includes managing and shaping both technological and market conditions.  In this view firms 
don’t maximize profits so much as they seek to survive through time.  If it is appropriate to say that businesses tend 
to maximize anything, it would be growth through

436                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


time rather than profits specifically.  Likewise, outright price competition is a relatively rare occur- rence  in 
mature markets  today.  Though  most  businesses  will  take competition into  consideration when  setting  their  
prices,  it  would  be  a  better  description  of  the  real  world  to  say  that  competi- tion occurs mainly 
through other practices, like advertising and branding, product innovations, or more cost-effective production 
practices.  That is to say that businesses compete chiefly through their investments, not their prices.



16.2  BUSINESS  MODELS,  PLURAL:  AIMS  AND  METHODS  OF  THE MEGACORP



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Identify different general methods by which businesses can pursue profits

•    Analyze the nature and significance of advertizing

•    Apply heterodox concepts to the analysis of the pharmaceutical industry





As a professor of mine, James Sturgeon, is fond of saying, there’s more than one way to make money: You could…

•   Steal
•   Extort
•   Accept a bribe
•   Speculate on the financial or real estate markets
•   Inherit
•   Con
•   Or, perhaps failing all of the above, you could earn it

For our purposes here, this can be interpreted as a rather cheeky way of saying that different busi- nesses have 
different business models–that is, different ways of making money in a market (or sev- eral markets).  And, while they 
might all be treated with the utmost abstraction as combining inputs to produce outputs of greater value, heterodox 
economists are inclined to believe that not every way of making money is the same.

Breaking down all of the means by which modern businesses make money is far beyond the scope of this chapter (though 
the odds are good that the reader is taking this course to fulfill a requirement for a business degree for which she or 
he will be spending plenty of time doing just that).  Instead, we’ll borrow from Karl Marx’s extensive work on how 
capitalist economies function to create a simplified picture, Figure 4, of what a business enterprise does.  And from 
there, we’ll look to institutional eco- nomics to understand qualitative difference in how businesses generate their 
earnings.

438                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 














Figure 4. The Business Enterprise in a Monetary Production Econ- omy.

In Figure 4, M represents an amount of money and C represents a commodity (for instance the lum- ber and other building 
materials a construction company may use to build a house).  P represents the production process that converts the 
commodity C (building materials) into some other commodity C’ (for instance, a house) to be sold for some amount of 
money M’.  This process can be treated as a shorthand depiction of what any business does, with the requirement that if 
the business is to remain in business M’ must be greater than M.  Take a moment to review the chapter “Cost and 
Industry Structure,” specifically the definitions of firm and production therein.  How does Figure 4 differ?

The  difference  may  not  be  obvious,  but  it  is  important.   In  the  neoclassical  tradition  in  econom- 
ics–indeed, in the classical tradition which Marx was critiquing–production by businesses is treated as a C→ C’ 
process.  That is, all business activity is part of converting commodity inputs into com- modity outputs which are of 
greater value, ultimately, to consumers.  Clearly, Figure 4 is more than that: it treats money and commodities as 
distinct things.  This allows us to look at the step-by-step process by which money is converted into commodities, 
production creates new commodities, and money is created by sale of those new commodities.  The whole process of 
turning money into com- modity inputs and ultimately selling commodity outputs for money we’ll call monetary 
production. The full implications of these distinctions for Marxian (or radical political) economics would require its 
own course.  For now, we can use this shorthand description of how a business enterprise works to think about different 
types of business models.

The  three  numbered  arrows  in  Figure  4  represent  three  different  ways  that  managers,  engineers, markers, 
and others within a business enterprise can influence the process of monetary production. The first arrow, following M 
to P, indicates something close to the traditional way of thinking of a business: money is invested into a production 
process that turns inputs into outputs for sale.  This could include building a new factory or setting up a research 
and development (R&D) team to design new products and more efficient production practices.  What is significant here is 
that the focus is on producing something–turning stuff C into stuff C’, presumably with the hope that people will be 
will- ing to pay more for C’ than was paid for the C necessary to produce it.

The second arrow indicates a different business model–that is, another way the monetary production process could be 
influenced to make money.  Here, you will notice, the initial money invested is going not to production, P, but to the 
produced commodity, C’.  This is meant to indicate investments made to change the perceived value of the product the 
business sells.  Of course, one way to do this is to improve the product itself, which would be indicated by the first 
arrow.  With arrow 2, however, we’re

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   439

dealing with changing the perceived value of the product without actually changing the product itself; and you’ve 
probably already guessed the most salient way this can be done: advertising.

Here, the founder of institutional economics, Thorstein Veblen, is worth quoting at length:

The end sought by the systematic advertising of the larger business concerns is…a monopoly of custom and prestige.… The 
great end of consistent advertising is to establish such differen- tial monopolies resting on popular conviction…. The 
cost, as well as the pecuniary value and the magnitude, of this organized fabrication of popular convictions is 
indicated by such state- ments as that the proprietors of a certain well-known household remedy, reputed among medical 
authorities to be of entirely dubious value, have for a series of years found their prof- its in spending several 
million dollars annually in advertisements.  This case is by no means unique.

It  has been said, no doubt in good faith and certainly with some reason, that advertising as currently carried on 
gives the body of consumers valuable information and guidance  as to the ways and means whereby their wants can be 
satisfied and their purchasing power can be best utilized.  To the extent to which this holds true, advertising is a 
service to the commu- nity.  But there is a large reservation to be made on this head.  Advertising is competitive; the 
greater part of it aims to divert purchases, etc., from one channel to another channel of the same general class.  And 
to the extent to which the efforts of advertising in all its branches are spent on this competitive disturbance of 
trade, they are, on the whole, of slight if any immedi- ate service to the community. (Veblen 1904, pp. 55-7, Public 
Domain, emphasis added)

Veblen’s inimitable prose may be a bit irksome to read, but reference to the italicized bits above should be enough to 
understand the argument.  ‘Custom and prestige,’ and the ‘fabrication of popular con- viction’ suggest that businesses 
are competing through persuasion rather than production of some- thing of value.  The second paragraph, then, considers 
whether these activities are actually of value to society (or perhaps, in neoclassical terms, whether or not they’re 
‘welfare enhancing’).  For the most part, they are decidedly not.  They may create a pecuniary (that is, money) value 
for the business–the perception of C’ is improved and M’ increases as a result.  But, to society in general they amount 
to little more than a needless shifting of buying habits and consumption patterns.  As Professor Sturgeon notes, 
there’s more than one way to make money.

We should pause to consider the usefulness of this model. Separating money from commodities in the monetary production 
process has allowed us to consider different business activities as essentially different things.  The abstract firm in 
standard neoclassical theory might lead us to treat anything that makes a business more money as part of the production 
process (C…P…C’), suggesting that advertis- ing was just another commodity in the production process improving the 
value of the product to be sold.  By implication, then, the advertising added value to society.  Yet, treating 
production and adver- tising as two different activities allowed room for the argument that, in fact, the advertising 
was gen- erally wasteful.


DISTINGUISHING ARROW 1 FROM ARROW 2: THE PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY

A contemporary example should indicate the importance of distinguishing between arrows 1 and 2.  The price of pharma- 
ceutical drugs continues to be a controversial topic in the United States, and it’s no surprise why: according to the 
OECD,

440                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 



pharmaceutical spending has risen from an average of $159 per person (or 0.87% of all spending in the US) in 1985 to
$1,112 per person (or 2.04% of total spending) in 2014.  Moreover, a 2016 Reuters article found that the prices of 4 of 
the top 10 most widely used drugs more than doubled in just the previous 5 years.

A number of factors are important to explaining these rapid price increases, including an aging population in the US 
and an exceedingly complex distribution and insurance system for pharmaceuticals.  But, let’s focus on the common 
explanation given by the producers themselves: high prices are necessary to recover the high costs of research and 
development (much of which leads to dead-end investments that don’t produce effective drugs that can be brought to 
market) and the clinical trials necessary for regulatory approval.  Clearly, this is in line with the general framework 
of heterodox economic theory. Pharmaceutical companies are engaging in long-run planning, including significant 
investments into better products (that is, investments into P in Figure 1), and prices are a reflection of those 
investments.

But, what’s more, our monetary production model can help us find a fuller explanation of the nature and extent of those 
investments.   Consider  estimates  from  Gagnon  and  Lexchin  (2008)  on  promotional  expenditures  by  the  
industry.   The authors  found  that,  for  2004,  the  industry  devoted  about  24%  of  its  sales  revenue  to  
promotion,  versus  about  13%  to research and development.  Looking specifically to promotion directed at physicians, 
the authors estimate that approxi- mately $61,000 was spent per physician in the US.  To be sure,  there are other 
estimates lower than those made by Gagnon and Lexchin.  Just the same, it is clear that pharmaceutical enterprises are 
investing heavily not only in developing new drugs, but in promoting their use as well.

Moreover, the pharmaceutical industry provides us with a somewhat unique opportunity to clearly distinguish investments 
in C’ (arrow 2 in figure 1) from investments in P (arrow 1).  Because these drugs are systematically evaluated for 
their effec- tiveness in treating specific illnesses, data exist to indicate how well supposedly-arrow 1 investments 
are improving the product.  On this matter, Gagnon (2013) finds that fewer and fewer new molecular entities (truly new 
drugs, without prece- dent in drugs already in use) are being developed, and only a small minority of new drugs 
represent substantial therapeutic advances over existing treatments.  The proliferation of ‘me-too’ drugs, which are 
new products to be marketed if not actu- ally better treatments for illnesses, suggests that the business model in this 
industry is focused less on improvements in P and more on inflating C’.  That is, arrow 2 appears to dominate, with 
arrow 1 a secondary concern, in the normal business models of this industry.

Sources: https://data.oecd.org/healthres/pharmaceutical-spending.htm 
http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-healthcare-drugpricing-idUSKCN0X10TH
Gagnon, M. A. and J. Lexchin. (2008), “The Cost of Pushing Pills: A New Estimate of Pharmaceutical Promotion Expendi- 
tures in the United States,” PLoSMedicine, 5(1), 29-33.
Gagnon, M. A. (2013). Corruption of pharmaceutical  markets: Addressing  the misalignment  of financial  incentives and 
public health. The Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics, 41(3), 571-580.

Finally, there is arrow 3, a direct line from an initial sum of money to a greater amount of money, bypassing all the 
troublesome in-between steps of producing and selling a good or service.  This sort of business model takes many forms 
and is becoming increasingly popular in the capitalism of today. The traditional exemplar is the financial firm–or, 
say, the stock broker–which has no direct ties to actually producing something, but rather only to trading in the 
ownership rights of those producers.

The  full  role  and  consequences  of  financial  firms  and  markets  cannot  be  covered  here.   What’s  of 
interest presently is business activity that can turn a profit without being concerned with producing something for 
sale, or even simply with persuading people to buy a product.  You may have heard

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   441

about the causes of the Great Recession of 2008-09 being chiefly linked to business models in finance, insurance,  and  
real  estate  (the  so-called  FIRE  sector).   The  problem,  many  believe,  is  in  the  opac- ity and complexity of 
a system in which mortgage contracts representing an agreement to pay for a house over time were packaged together into 
derivative contracts to be sold to investors, then resold, repackaged, and so on.  Indeed to make a system even more 
complex, many financial firms were mak- ing side bets that the contracts they themselves were selling would in fact not 
pay out.  Many articles, books, and documentaries have been produced retelling that story, and The Big Short is an 
effective and accurate dramatization of some of those events.  For now, it is enough to say that the businesses engaged 
in those activities were largely concerned with turning money into more money by persuad- ing others that these 
contracts built on contracts (built on contracts…) were worth more than they were.  These were arrow 3 business 
activities, having little to do with the actual business of housing people.

A century earlier, Veblen had described similar practices in the stock markets, where the goal is to,

induce a discrepancy between the putative and the actual earning-capacity, by expedients well known and approved for 
the purpose. Partial information, as well as misinformation, sagaciously given out at a critical juncture, will go far 
toward producing a favorable tempo- rary discrepancy of this kind. (Veblen, 1904, p. 156, Public Domain)

It was, more recently, precisely this type of behavior which ultimately caused the deepest recession since the Great 
Depression (which, incidentally, had also been caused by this type of behavior).  As a result, many of the largest 
banks and other financial institutions in the US and abroad have been made to pay fines in the 10’s of billions of 
dollars.  Whether these fines will be enough to make this business model unattractive in the future is debatable–but it 
seems unlikely.
