


16.3  STABILIZING  UNSTABLE  MARKETS



LEARNING OBJECTIVES


By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Situate businesses and their business models within their market governance structures
•    Define infrastructure, corporate governance, and market governance





The previous sections dealt mainly with the nature of the modern business enterprise as an individual organization.  
But, of course, no business is created in a vacuum, and no business can operate in com- plete isolation.  This section 
will look at the economic, social, and political nature of markets to better understand how real businesses fit into a 
heterodox understanding of the economy.

Any business model–including those discussed above and beyond–is a plan for how to successfully operate a business 
within one or more markets.  A good business plan will have to consider, among other things, the competition, the 
potential customer base, rules and regulations, and the necessary infrastructure to produce and distribute the product, 
whatever it may be.  Established businesses will have worked out their business models over time, will have built (or 
had built for them) the neces- sary infrastructure (for instance, roads or communications protocols), and will 
typically have helped define the rules and regulations that dictate which individual and competitive activities are 
permis- sible and which are not.  This is to say that markets themselves are defined by (and the way business 
enterprises behave in these markets is guided by) their infrastructure and their corporate and market governance 
structures.


DEFINITIONS

Infrastructure: the common structures, facilities, and systems necessary for organizations to operate.  These may 
include physical infrastructure like highways, bridges, electrical grids, and sewage systems; as well as systems like 
the complex net- works of computers tied together through communications lines and protocols we know as the internet.

Corporate governance: the rules and practices defining how and by whom a business is directed as well as how members of 
the business will interact with each other and those outside of the business.  These are both formal rules like 
accounting practices or the corporate hierarchy of who reports to whom, as well as informal norms, traditions, and 
relationships.

Market governance: the rules and practices defining how business enterprises will behave in a market, including 
especially

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   443


how they will interact with their competitors.  These may include formal agreements–for instance, a consent decree by 
which a business agrees not to engage in an activity the government considers anticompetitive, or a joint venture 
operation between two energy companies to explore a potential source of crude oil.  Probably more important, though, 
are the var- ious informal arrangements by which certain types of competition and cooperation between businesses are 
allowed while others are not.
A side note: these shared rules and infrastructure are not fixed in time–they evolve, whether by unintended consequence 
or intentional change.  Moreover, they are socially constructed, which means there is a political element to all of 
them. Although we’re focusing for now on the private, business side of the matter, it should be remembered that there 
is almost always a government role in the development, regulation, and sometimes prohibition of these structures.  
Finally, a fourth component, property rigftts, is worth adding.  Property rights are legal norms defining who can own 
what, what can be done with that property, and therefore how businesses can generate earnings and who has claims on 
those earnings.  While property is often considered simply a natural right, the actual content of property rights is a 
complex, perpetually evolving, and highly contested subject.

These attributes of the organization of businesses and the markets in which they operate are all geared toward 
essentially the same thing: stability.  As an earlier section explained, most parts of the modern economy involve 
sophisticated and usually large-scale technologies.  For this and other reasons long term planning is necessary for 
production to go forward; and long term planning requires predictable outcomes.  Hence, markets and businesses must be 
organized to promote stability.  In particular, as a previous section explains, businesses require predictability in 
prices.

Now, consider the neoclassical models of previous chapters.  In each of these some, perhaps natural, equilibration 
process is used–that is, a process by which firm’s, consumers, and ultimately markets move toward an equilibrium,  
toward stability.  The utility maximizing consumer seeks an optimal combination of consumers goods, the profit 
maximizing firm seeks an optimal level of production, and the market, through competition and price bidding, moves 
toward the equilibrium price and out- put.

Many heterodox economists reject each of these models, in part because of the unrealistic mecha- nisms by which 
equilibrium is reached.  For instance, as chapter “Costs and Prices” demonstrates, few markets in the modern US economy 
are characterized by the sort of price adjustments that the stan- dard market model relies on to reach a stable 
equilibrium.  Moreover, considerable evidence suggests that competition–especially price competition–actually promotes 
instability.  And it is for this reason that the concept of market governance is so important.  Without a workable set 
of norms concern- ing acceptable and unacceptable forms of competition and cooperation, most markets would never reach 
equilibrium.  Instead, price competition and chicanery would wreak havoc on businesses and consumers alike.



16.4  THE  HIGH  PRICE  OF  COLLEGE  TEXTBOOKS



n this concluding section of the chapter we’ll look at a question you’ve probably asked yourself: why do college 
textbooks cost so much?  The question is particularly interesting for economic the- ory.  Nationally, textbooks prices 
have risen more than three times the prices of other goods and services in the economy–an increase from the 1977 to 
2015 of 1,041%, reports ABC News. As of Sep- tember 2016, the average  undergraduate student will be spending just shy 
of $1,300 a year on text-
books and supplies.  That’s no small sum.

Standard analysis would look for low elasticities of demand and lack of competition to explain high prices.  Question: 
as a student, is your demand for college textbooks elastic or inelastic?  Why?  Likely, you answered ‘very inelastic’ 
since you have little choice in buying a textbook that is required for a course. (In fact a 2014 Student PIRG survey 
found that two thirds of students had foregone buying at least one textbook due to cost.  Not surprisingly, almost all 
of those students indicated concern that the decision would impact their grades negatively.)

As for competition in the textbook publishing business, it may not surprise you to learn that, like in most other 
markets, there are only a handful of large corporations controlling the bulk of the college textbook supply.  
International corporations, which in many cases have existed for over a century, dominate the global market for these 
products, bringing in billions of dollars in revenue each year. While not a pure monopoly, it would seem that this 
industry is closer to our neoclassical monopoly model than to perfect competition.  The outcome of this captive-market 
situation, as you’ve seen in a previous chapter, is clear: fewer students purchase textbooks than would like, and they 
pay higher prices than would exist under more competitive conditions.

But, then, is competition the solution?  Certainly, the industry meets the definition of high concentra- tion, 
suggesting that textbook publishing is far from the ideal model of perfect competition.  Publish- ers appear to enjoy 
significant market power, especially in setting their own prices, rather than taking the competitive market price as 
given.  But, if we accept that these large corporations are not price takers in the markets for their books, we still 
have to answer: how–that is, for what reasons–do they determine the prices they will charge?  And this is where the 
business model becomes important.

The mainstream assumption that firms, always and everywhere, maximize profits suggests that out- put is being set 
according to marginal costs and marginal revenues, and that the high inelasticity of demand allows publishers to raise 
prices well above the actual costs of production.  Firms produce to maximize profits, and a lack of competition allows 
them to take monopoly rents through higher prices.

But, consider the heterodox position–that business enterprises generally want to survive and grow, and that competition 
occurs chiefly through investments, not prices.  This view suggests that it’s not so much that publishers wish to get 
every last dollar of profit to be had (that is, to maximize profits),

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   445

nor that they will raise prices to whatever the students (that is, demanders) are willing to pay.  Rather, these 
producers are seeking to make the investments necessary to survive (to make a profit) in their markets.  The prices 
they charge, then, may seem like price gouging, but may really just be the results of the markups necessary to cover 
the costs of those investments.  (However, the more recent focus among publicly traded companies on keeping stock 
prices up may drive them toward price gouging over simply pricing to cover full costs.)

And this is where we come back to the original question: is competition the solution?  From the per- spective of 
heterodox economics, the high price of college textbooks reflects the high cost of investing in new textbook 
editions–in computer software tools to complement the text (and ensure the student pays for the online access), in test 
banks and slideshows to aid the instructor using the text, and so on.  And what compels publishers to make these 
investments?  Largely, competition.  If a publisher neglected to develop new editions, it could not compete with the 
used textbook markets.  If a pub- lisher fell behind in developing software and supplements for instructors, the other 
publishers would have a competitive advantage in pitching their texts to instructors.  Perhaps surprisingly, the 
conclu- sion is that prices are high, not so much from a lack of price competition, but because of a particu- lar 
dynamic in investment competition.  It is–or so one could argue–a lack of appropriate planning across the industry as a 
whole that keeps publishers grasping at market share by investing in anything and everything that might help sell their 
textbooks…and the student pays the price.


THE COURTS AND PROPERTY RIGHTS

In a previous breakout box it was mentioned that a proper understanding of market structure would require, among other 
things, an understanding of the specific property rights relevant to production, exchange, and consumption processes of 
the market.  A recent US Supreme Court case offers a good illustration of that very point.

John Wiley & Sons, Inc. is a global publishing company with thousands of employees and a market cap (total value of 
out- standing shares) in the billions of dollars.  In 2008 Wiley sued Supap Kirtsaeng for copyright infringement.  
Kirtsaeng, a Thailand native who had studied in the US, had discovered that foreign edition textbooks could be imported 
into the US to be sold at lower prices than the texts’ American-edition prices.  Wiley believed that this was a 
violation of their property rights which included the right to prevent importation of their copyrighted works.

While two lower courts sided with the publisher’s position on the control that copyright afforded them, the US Supreme 
Court did not.  They argued in their ruling that the ‘first-sale doctrine’, allowing those who obtained a textbook 
legally to re-sell it, limited Wiley’s right to control the importation of their books.  As an economist-in-training, 
how do you think things would be different if the Supreme Court had ruled in favor of Wiley?  Would prices continue to 
rise, plateau, or come down?  Would this change the direction of investment in the publishing industry?  How would 
students, faculties, and higher education more generally be affected?






CHAPTER 17. MONOPOLY AND ANTITRUST POLICY
