


17.2  REGULATING  ANTICOMPETITIVE  BEHAVIOR



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Analyze restrictive practices

•    Explain tying sales, bundling, and predatory pricing

•    Evaluate a real-world situation of possible anticompetitive and restrictive practices



he U.S. antitrust laws reach beyond blocking mergers that would reduce competition to include a wide array of 
anticompetitive practices. For example, it is illegal for competitors to form a  cartel to collude to make pricing and 
output decisions, as if they were a monopoly firm. The Federal Trade Commission and the U.S. Department of Justice 
prohibit firms from agreeing to fix prices or output, rigging bids, or sharing or dividing markets by allocating 
customers, suppliers, ter-
ritories, or lines of commerce.

In the late 1990s, for example, the antitrust regulators prosecuted an international cartel of vitamin manufacturers, 
including the Swiss firm Hoffman-La Roche, the German firm BASF, and the French firm Rhone-Poulenc. These firms reached 
agreements on how much to produce, how much to charge, and which firm would sell to which customers. The high-priced 
vitamins were then bought by firms like General Mills, Kellogg, Purina-Mills, and Proctor and Gamble, which pushed up 
the prices more. Hoffman-La Roche pleaded guilty in May 1999 and agreed both to pay a fine of $500 million and to have 
at least one top executive serve four months of jail time.

Under U.S. antitrust laws, monopoly itself is not illegal. If a firm has a monopoly because of a newly patented 
invention, for example, the law explicitly allows a firm to earn higher-than-normal profits for a time as a reward for 
innovation. If a firm achieves a large share of the market by producing a better product at a lower price, such 
behavior is not prohibited by antitrust law.

RESTRICTIVE PRACTICES
Antitrust  law  includes  rules  against  restrictive  practices—practices  that  do  not  involve  outright agreements 
to raise price or to reduce the quantity produced, but that might have the effect of reduc- ing competition. Antitrust 
cases involving restrictive practices are often controversial, because they delve into specific contracts or agreements 
between firms that are allowed in some cases but not in others.

460                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


For example, if a product manufacturer is selling to a group of dealers who then sell to the general public it is 
illegal for the manufacturer to demand a minimum resale price maintenance agreement, which would require the dealers to 
sell for at least a certain minimum price. A minimum price con- tract  is  illegal  because  it  would  restrict  
competition  among  dealers.  However,  the  manufacturer  is legally allowed to “suggest” minimum prices and to stop 
selling to dealers who regularly undercut the suggested price. If you think this rule sounds like a fairly subtle 
distinction, you are right.

An exclusive dealing agreement between a manufacturer and a dealer can be legal or illegal. It is legal if the purpose 
of the contract is to encourage competition between dealers. For example, it is legal for the Ford Motor Company to 
sell its cars to only Ford dealers, for General Motors to sell to only GM dealers, and so on. However, exclusive deals 
may also limit competition. If one large retailer obtained the exclusive rights to be the sole distributor of 
televisions, computers, and audio equipment made by a number of companies, then this exclusive contract would have an 
anticompetitive effect on other retailers.

Tying sales happen when a customer is required to buy one product only if the customer also buys a second product. 
Tying sales are controversial because they force consumers to purchase a product that they may not actually want or 
need. Further, the additional, required products are not necessarily advantageous to the customer. Suppose that to 
purchase a popular DVD, the store required that you also purchase a portable TV of a certain model. These products are 
only loosely related, thus there is no reason to make the purchase of one contingent on the other. Even if a customer 
was interested in a portable TV, the tying to a particular model prevents the customer from having the option of 
selecting one from the numerous types available in the market. A related, but not identical, concept is called 
bundling, where two or more products are sold as one. Bundling typically offers an advantage for the consumer by 
allowing them to acquire multiple products or services for a better price. For example, several cable companies allow 
customers to buy products like cable, internet, and a phone line through a special price available through bundling. 
Customers are also welcome to purchase these products separately, but the price of bundling is usually more appealing.

In some cases, tying sales and bundling can be viewed as anticompetitive. However, in other cases they may be legal and 
even common. It is common for people to purchase season tickets to a sports team or a set of concerts so that they can 
be guaranteed tickets to the few contests or shows that are most popular and likely to sell out. Computer software 
manufacturers may often bundle together a number of different programs, even when the buyer wants only a few of the 
programs. Think about the software that is included in a new computer purchase, for example.
Recall from the chapter on Monopoly that predatory pricing occurs when the existing firm (or firms) reacts to a new 
firm by dropping prices very low, until the new firm is driven out of the market, at which point the existing firm 
raises prices again. This pattern of pricing is aimed at deterring the entry of new firms into the market. But in 
practice, it can be hard to figure out when pricing should be considered predatory. Say that American Airlines is 
flying between two cities, and a new airline starts flying between the same two cities, at a lower price. If American 
Airlines cuts its price to match the new entrant, is this predatory pricing? Or is it just market competition at work? 
A commonly pro- posed rule is that if a firm is selling for less than its average variable cost—that is, at a price 
where it should be shutting down—then there is evidence for predatory pricing. But calculating in the real world what 
costs are variable and what costs are fixed is often not obvious, either.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   461

The Microsoft antitrust case embodies many of these gray areas in restrictive practices, as the next Clear it Up shows.


DID MICROSOFT® ENGAGE IN ANTICOMPETITIVE AND RESTRICTIVE PRACTICES?

The  most  famous  restrictive  practices  case  of  recent  years  was  a  series  of  lawsuits  by  the  U.S.  
government  against Microsoft—lawsuits that were encouraged by some of Microsoft’s competitors. All sides admitted that 
Microsoft’s Win- dows program had a near-monopoly position in the market for the software used in general computer 
operating systems. All sides agreed that the software had many satisfied customers. All sides agreed that the 
capabilities of computer software that was compatible with Windows—both software produced by Microsoft and that 
produced by other companies—had expanded dramatically in the 1990s. Having a monopoly or a near-monopoly is not 
necessarily illegal in and of itself, but in cases where one company controls a great deal of the market, antitrust 
regulators look at any allegations of restrictive practices with special care.
The antitrust regulators argued that Microsoft had gone beyond profiting from its software innovations and its dominant 
position in the software market for operating systems, and had tried to use its market power in operating systems 
software to take over other parts of the software industry. For example, the government argued that Microsoft had 
engaged in an anticompetitive form of exclusive dealing by threatening computer makers that, if they did not leave 
another firm’s soft- ware off their machines (specifically, Netscape’s Internet browser), then Microsoft would not sell 
them its operating system software. Microsoft was accused by the government antitrust regulators of tying together its 
Windows operating system software, where it had a monopoly, with its Internet Explorer browser software, where it did 
not have a monopoly, and thus using this bundling as an anticompetitive tool. Microsoft was also accused of a form of 
predatory pricing; namely, giving away certain additional software products for free as part of Windows, as a way of 
driving out the competition from other makers of software.
In  April  2000,  a  federal  court  held  that  Microsoft’s  behavior  had  crossed  the  line  into  unfair  
competition,  and  recom- mended that the company be broken into two competing firms. However, that penalty was 
overturned on appeal, and in November 2002 Microsoft reached a settlement with the government that it would end its 
restrictive practices.

The concept of restrictive practices is continually evolving, as firms seek new ways to earn profits and government 
regulators define what is permissible and what is not. A situation where the law is evolv- ing and changing is always 
somewhat troublesome, since laws are most useful and fair when firms know what they are in advance. In addition, since 
the law is open to interpretation, competitors who are losing out in the market can accuse successful firms of 
anticompetitive restrictive practices, and try to win through government regulation what they have failed to accomplish 
in the market. Officials at the Federal Trade Commission and the Department of Justice are, of course, aware of these 
issues, but there is no easy way to resolve them.

KEY CONCEPTS AND SUMMARY

Firms are blocked by antitrust authorities from openly colluding to form a cartel that will reduce out- put and raise 
prices. Companies sometimes attempt to find other ways around these restrictions and, consequently, many antitrust 
cases involve restrictive practices that can reduce competition in certain circumstances, like tie-in sales, bundling, 
and predatory pricing.

462                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 



SELF-CHECK QUESTIONS



Why would a firm choose to use one or more of the anticompetitive practices described in Regulating Anticompetitive 
Behavior?



REVIEW QUESTIONS



1.    What is a minimum resale price maintenance agreement? How might it reduce competition and when might it be 
acceptable?
2.    What is exclusive dealing? How might it reduce competition and when might it be acceptable?
3.    What is a tie-in sale? How might it reduce competition and when might it be acceptable?
4.    What is predatory pricing? How might it reduce competition, and why might it be difficult to tell when it should 
be illegal?



CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS



1.    Can you think of any examples of successful predatory pricing in the real world?
2.    If you were developing a product (like a web browser) for a market with significant barriers to entry, how would 
you try to get your product into the market successfully?



GLOSSARY
bundling a situation in which multiple products are sold as one
exclusive dealing an agreement that a dealer will sell only products from one manufacturer minimum resale price 
maintenance agreement an agreement that requires a dealer who buys from a manufacturer to sell for at least a certain 
minimum price
restrictive practices practices that reduce competition but that do not involve outright agreements between firms to 
raise prices or to reduce the quantity produced
tying sales a situation where a customer is allowed to buy one product only if the customer also
buys another product

SOLUTIONS


Answers to Self-Cfteck Questions
Because outright collusion to raise profits is illegal and because existing regulations include gray areas which firms 
may be able to exploit.



17.3  REGULATING  NATURAL  MONOPOLIES



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Evaluate the appropriate competition policy for a natural monopoly

•    Interpret a graph of regulatory choices

•    Contrast cost-plus and price cap regulation



ost true monopolies today in the U.S. are regulated, natural monopolies. A natural monop- oly  poses  a  difficult  
challenge  for  competition  policy,  because  the  structure  of  costs  and demand seems to make competition unlikely 
or costly. A natural monopoly arises when
average costs are declining over the range of production that satisfies market demand. This typically happens when 
fixed costs are large relative to variable costs. As a result, one firm is able to supply the total quantity demanded 
in the market at lower cost than two or more firms—so splitting up the nat- ural monopoly would raise the average cost 
of production and force customers to pay more.

Public  utilities,  the  companies  that  have  traditionally  provided  water  and  electrical  service  across much 
of the United States, are leading examples of natural monopoly. It would make little sense to argue that a local water 
company should be broken up into several competing companies, each with its own separate set of pipes and water 
supplies. Installing four or five identical sets of pipes under a city, one for each water company, so that each 
household could choose its own water provider, would be terribly costly. The same argument applies to the idea of 
having many competing companies for delivering electricity to homes, each with its own set of wires. Before the advent 
of wireless phones, the argument also applied to the idea of many different phone companies, each with its own set of 
phone wires running through the neighborhood.

THE CHOICES IN REGULATING A NATURAL MONOPOLY

So what then is the appropriate competition policy for a natural monopoly? Figure 1 illustrates the case of natural 
monopoly, with a market demand curve that cuts through the downward-sloping por- tion of the average cost curve. Points 
A, B, C, and F illustrate four of the main choices for regulation. Table 5 outlines the regulatory choices for dealing 
with a natural monopoly.

464                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 























Figure 1. Regulatory Choices in Dealing with Natural Monopoly. A natural monopoly will maximize profits by producing at 
the quan- tity where marginal revenue (MR) equals marginal costs (MC) and by then looking to the market demand curve to 
see what price to charge  for  this  quantity.  This  monopoly  will  produce  at  point  A, with a quantity of 4 and a 
price of 9.3. If antitrust regulators split this company exactly in half, then each half would produce at point B, with 
average costs of 9.75 and output of 2. The regulators might require the firm to produce where marginal cost crosses the 
market demand curve at point C. However, if the firm is required to pro- duce at a quantity of 8 and sell at a price of 
3.5, the firm will suf- fer from losses. The most likely choice is point F, where the firm is required to produce a 
quantity of 6 and charge a price of 6.5.

Quantity        Price       Total Revenue*             Marginal Revenue             Total Cost         Marginal Cost    
       Average Cost
1                        14.7         14.7                                 –                                            
  11.0                     –                                    11.00
2                        12.4         24.7                                 10.0                                        
19.5                     8.5                                 9.75
3                        10.6         31.7                                 7.0                                          
 25.5                     6.0                                 8.50
4                        9.3           37.2                                 5.5                                         
  31.0                     5.5                                 7.75
5                        8.0           40.0                                 2.8                                         
  35.0                     4.0                                 7.00
6                        6.5           39.0                                 –1.0                                        
39.0                     4.0                                 6.50
7                        5.0           35.0                                 –4.0                                        
42.0                     3.0                                 6.00
8                        3.5           28.0                                 –7.0                                        
45.5                     3.5                                 5.70
9                        2.0           18.0                                 –10.0                                      
49.5                     4.0                                 5.5
Table 5. Regulatory Choices in Dealing with Natural Monopoly. (*Total Revenue is given by multiplying price and 
quantity. However, some of the price values in this table have been rounded for ease of presentation.)

The first possibility is to leave the natural monopoly alone. In this case, the monopoly will follow its

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   465

normal approach to maximizing profits. It determines the quantity where MR = MC, which happens at point P at a quantity 
of 4. The firm then looks to point A on the demand curve to find that it can charge a price of 9.3 for that 
profit-maximizing quantity. Since the price is above the average cost curve, the natural monopoly would earn economic 
profits.

A second outcome arises if antitrust authorities decide to divide the company, so that the new firms can compete. As a 
simple example, imagine that the company is cut in half. Thus, instead of one large firm producing a quantity of 4, two 
half-size firms each produce a quantity of 2. Because of the declin- ing average cost curve (AC), the average cost of 
production for each of the half-size companies each producing 2, as shown at point B, would be 9.75, while the average 
cost of production for a larger firm producing 4 would only be 7.75. Thus, the economy would become less productively 
efficient, since the good is being produced at a higher average cost. In a situation with a downward-sloping average 
cost curve, two smaller firms will always have higher average costs of production than one larger firm for any quantity 
of total output. In addition, the antitrust authorities must worry that splitting the natural monopoly into pieces may 
be only the start of their problems. If one of the two firms grows larger than the other, it will have lower average 
costs and may be able to drive its competitor out of the market. Alternatively, two firms in a market may discover 
subtle ways of coordinating their behavior and keeping prices high. Either way, the result will not be the greater 
competition that was desired.

A third alternative is that regulators may decide to set prices and quantities produced for this industry. The 
regulators will try to choose a point along the market demand curve that benefits both consumers and the broader social 
interest. Point C illustrates one tempting choice: the regulator requires that the firm produce the quantity of output 
where marginal cost crosses the demand curve at an output of 8, and charge the price of 3.5, which is equal to marginal 
cost at that point. This rule is appealing because it requires price to be set equal to marginal cost, which is what 
would occur in a perfectly competitive  market,  and  it  would  assure  consumers  a  higher  quantity  and  lower  
price  than  at  the monopoly choice A. In fact, efficient allocation of resources would occur at point C, since the 
value to the consumers of the last unit bought and sold in this market is equal to the marginal cost of produc- ing it.

Attempting to bring about point C through force of regulation, however, runs into a severe difficulty. At point C, with 
an output of 8, a price of 3.5 is below the average cost of production, which is 5.7, and so if the firm charges a 
price of 3.5, it will be suffering losses. Unless the regulators or the govern- ment offer the firm an ongoing public 
subsidy (and there are numerous political problems with that option), the firm will lose money and go out of business.

Perhaps the most plausible option for the regulator is point F; that is, to set the price where AC crosses the demand 
curve at an output of 6 and a price of 6.5. This plan makes some sense at an intuitive level: let the natural monopoly 
charge enough to cover its average costs and earn a normal rate of profit, so that it can continue operating, but 
prevent the firm from raising prices and earning abnormally high monopoly profits, as it would at the monopoly choice 
A. Of course, determining this level of output and price with the political pressures, time constraints, and limited 
information of the real world is much harder than identifying the point on a graph. For more on the problems that can 
arise from a centrally determined price, see the discussion of price floors and price ceilings in Demand and Sup- ply.

466                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 

COST-PLUS VERSUS PRICE CAP REGULATION

Indeed, regulators of public utilities for many decades followed the general approach of attempting to choose a point 
like F in Figure 1. They calculated the average cost of production for the water or electricity companies, added in an 
amount for the normal rate of profit the firm should expect to earn, and set the price for consumers accordingly. This 
method was known as cost-plus regulation.

Cost-plus regulation raises difficulties of its own. If producers are reimbursed for their costs, plus a bit more, then 
at a minimum, producers have less reason to be concerned with high costs—because they can just pass them along in 
higher prices. Worse, firms under cost-plus regulation even have an incentive to generate high costs by building huge 
factories or employing lots of staff, because what they can charge is linked to the costs they incur.
Thus, in the 1980s and 1990s, some regulators of public utilities began to use price cap regulation, where the 
regulator sets a price that the firm can charge over the next few years. A common pattern was to require a price that 
declined slightly over time. If the firm can find ways of reducing its costs more quickly than the price caps, it can 
make a high level of profits. However, if the firm cannot keep up with the price caps or suffers bad luck in the 
market, it may suffer losses. A few years down the road, the regulators will then set a new series of price caps based 
on the firm’s performance.

Price cap regulation requires delicacy. It will not work if the price regulators set the price cap unreal- istically 
low. It may not work if the market changes dramatically so that the firm is doomed to incur- ring losses no matter what 
it does—say, if energy prices rise dramatically on world markets, then the company selling natural gas or heating oil 
to homes may not be able to meet price caps that seemed reasonable a year or two ago. But if the regulators compare the 
prices with producers of the same good in other areas, they can, in effect, pressure a natural monopoly in one area to 
compete with the prices being charged in other areas. Moreover, the possibility of earning greater profits or experi- 
encing losses—instead of having an average rate of profit locked in every year by cost-plus regula- tion—can provide 
the natural monopoly with incentives for efficiency and innovation.

With natural monopoly, market competition is unlikely to take root, so if consumers are not to suffer the high prices 
and restricted output of an unrestricted monopoly, government regulation will need to play a role. In attempting to 
design a system of price cap regulation with flexibility and incentive, government regulators do not have an easy task.

KEY CONCEPTS AND SUMMARY

In the case of a natural monopoly, market competition will not work well and so, rather than allowing an unregulated 
monopoly to raise price and reduce output, the government may wish to regulate price and/or output. Common examples of 
regulation  are public  utilities, the regulated  firms  that often provide electricity and water service.

Cost-plus regulation refers to government regulation of a firm which sets the price that a firm can charge over a 
period of time by looking at the firm’s accounting costs and then adding a normal rate of profit. Price cap regulation 
refers to government regulation of a firm where the government sets a price level several years in advance. In this 
case, the firm can either make high profits if it manages to produce at lower costs or sell a higher quantity than 
expected or suffer low profits or losses if costs are high or it sells less than expected.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   467




SELF-CHECK QUESTIONS



1.    Urban transit systems, especially those with rail systems, typically experience significant economies of scale in 
operation. Consider the transit system whose data is given in the Table 6. Note that the quantity is in millions of 
riders.

Demand:    Quantity                      1       2       3       4       5    6       7       8       9       10
Price                             10    9       8       7       6    5       4       3       2       1
Marginal Revenue    10    8       6       4       2    0       –2     –4     –6     –8
Costs:          Marginal Cost            9       6       5       3       2    3       4       5       7       10
Average Cost              9       7.5    6.7    5.8    5    4.7    4.6    4.6    4.9    5.4
Table 6.

Draw  the  demand,  marginal  revenue,  marginal  cost,  and  average  cost  curves.  Do  they  have  the  normal 
shapes?
2.    From the graph you drew to answer Self-Check Question 1, would you say this transit system is a natural monopoly? 
Justify.



REVIEW QUESTIONS



1.    If public utilities are a natural monopoly, what would be the danger in deregulating them?
2.    If public utilities are a natural monopoly, what would be the danger in splitting them up into a number of 
separate competing firms?
3.    What is cost-plus regulation?
4.    What is price cap regulation?




CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS



1.    In the middle of the twentieth century, major U.S. cities had multiple competing city bus companies. Today, there 
is usually only one and it runs as a subsidized, regulated monopoly. What do you suppose caused the change?
2.    Why are urban areas willing to subsidize urban transit systems? Does the argument for subsidies make sense to 
you?



PROBLEM



Use Table 6 to answer the following questions.

468                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 



1.    If the transit system was allowed to operate as an unregulated monopoly, what output would it supply and what 
price would it charge?
2.    If the transit system was regulated to operate with no subsidy (i.e., at zero economic profit), what approximate 
output would it supply and what approximate price would it charge?
3.    If the transit system was regulated to provide the most allocatively efficient quantity of output, what output 
would it supply and what price would it charge? What subsidy would be necessary to insure this efficient provision of 
transit services?



GLOSSARY
cost-plus regulation when regulators permit a regulated firm to cover its costs and to make a normal level of profit
price cap regulation when the regulator sets a price that a firm cannot exceed over the next few
years

SOLUTIONS


Answers to Self-Cfteck Questions

1.    Yes, all curves have normal shapes.



















Figure 2.

2.    Yes it is a natural monopoly because average costs decline over the range that satisfies the market demand. For 
example, at the point where the demand curve and the average cost curve meet, there are economies of scale.
