


18.4  THE  BENEFITS  AND  COSTS  OF  U.S.  ENVIRONMENTAL  LAWS



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Evaluate the benefits and costs of environmental protection

•    Explain the effects of ecotourism

•    Apply marginal analysis to illustrate the marginal costs and marginal benefits of reducing pollution



overnment economists have estimated that U.S. firms may pay more than $200 billion per year to comply with federal 
environmental laws. That is big bucks. Is the money well spent?

BENEFITS AND COSTS OF CLEAN AIR AND CLEAN WATER

The benefits of a cleaner environment can be divided into four areas: (1) people may stay healthier and live longer; 
(2) certain industries that rely on clean air and water, such as farming, fishing, and tourism, may benefit; (3) 
property values may be higher; and (4) people may simply enjoy a cleaner environment in a way that does not need to 
involve a market transaction. Some of these benefits, such as gains to tourism or farming, are relatively easy to value 
in economic terms. It is harder to assign a monetary value to others, such as the value of clean air for someone with 
asthma. It seems impossible to put a clear-cut monetary value on still others, such as the satisfaction you might feel 
from knowing that the air is clear over the Grand Canyon, even if you have never visited the Grand Canyon.

Although estimates of environmental benefits are not precise, they can still be revealing. For example, a study by the 
Environmental Protection Agency looked at the costs and benefits of the Clean Air Act from 1970 to 1990. It found that 
total costs over that time period were roughly $500 billion—a huge amount. However, it also found that a middle-range 
estimate of the health and other benefits from cleaner air was $22 trillion—about 44 times higher than the costs. A 
more recent study by the EPA estimated that the environmental benefits to Americans from the Clean Air Act will exceed 
their costs by a margin of four to one. The EPA estimated that “in 2010 the benefits of Clean Air Act programs will 
total about $110 billion. This estimate represents the value of avoiding increases in illness and premature death which 
would have prevailed.” Saying that overall benefits of environmental regula- tion have exceeded costs in the past, 
however, is very different from saying that every environmental regulation makes sense. For example, studies suggest 
that when breaking down emission reductions by type of contaminants, the benefits of air pollution control outweigh the 
costs primarily for particu- lates and lead, but when looking at other air pollutants, the costs of reducing them may 
be comparable

498                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


to or greater than the benefits. Just because some environmental regulations have had benefits much higher than costs 
does not prove that every individual regulation is a sensible idea.

ECOTOURISM: MAKING ENVIRONMENTALISM PAY
The definition of ecotourism is a little vague. Does it mean sleeping on the ground, eating roots, and getting close to 
wild animals? Does it mean flying in a helicopter to shoot anesthetic darts at African wildlife? Or a little of both? 
The definition may be fuzzy, but tourists who hope to appreciate the ecol- ogy of their destination—“eco tourists”—are 
the impetus to a big and growing business. The Interna- tional Ecotourism Society estimates that international tourists 
interested in seeing nature or wildlife will take 1.56 billion trips by 2020.

Visit The International Ecotourism Society’s website to learn more about The International Ecotourism Society, its pro- 
grams, and tourism’s role in sustainable community development.












Realizing the attraction of ecotourism, the residents of low-income countries may come to see that preserving wildlife 
habitats is more lucrative than, say, cutting down forests or grazing livestock to survive. In South Africa, Namibia, 
and Zimbabwe, for example, a substantial expansion of both rhi- noceros and elephant populations is broadly credited to 
ecotourism, which has given local commu- nities an economic interest in protecting them. Some of the leading ecotourism 
destinations include: Costa Rica and Panama in Central America; the Caribbean; Malaysia, and other South Pacific desti- 
nations; New Zealand; the Serengeti in Tanzania; the Amazon rain forests; and the Galapagos Islands. In many of these 
countries and regions, governments have enacted policies whereby revenues from ecotourism are shared with local 
communities, to give people in those local communities a kind of property right that encourages them to conserve their 
local environment.

Ecotourism needs careful management, so that the combination of eager tourists and local entrepre- neurs does not 
destroy what the visitors are coming to see. But whatever one’s qualms are about cer- tain kinds of ecotourism—such as 
the occasional practice of rich tourists shooting elderly lions with high-powered rifles—it is worth remembering that 
the alternative is often that low-income people in poor countries will damage their local environment in their effort 
to survive.

MARGINAL BENEFITS AND MARGINAL COSTS

We can use the tools of marginal analysis to illustrate the marginal costs and the marginal benefits of reducing 
pollution. Figure 1 illustrates a theoretical model of this situation. When the quantity of environmental protection is 
low so that pollution is extensive—for example, at quantity Qa—there are usually a lot of relatively cheap and easy 
ways to reduce pollution, and the marginal benefits of doing

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   499
so are quite high. At Qa, it makes sense to allocate more resources to fight pollution. However, as the extent of 
environmental protection increases, the cheap and easy ways of reducing pollution begin to decrease, and more costly 
methods must be used. The marginal cost curve rises. Also, as envi- ronmental protection increases, the largest 
marginal benefits are achieved first, followed by reduced marginal benefits. As the quantity of environmental 
protection increases to, say, Qb, the gap between marginal benefits and marginal costs narrows. At point Qc the 
marginal costs will exceed the mar- ginal benefits. At this level of environmental protection, society is not 
allocating resources efficiently, because too many resources are being given up to reduce pollution.























Figure 1. Marginal Costs and Marginal Benefits of Environmental Protec- tion. Reducing pollution is costly—resources 
must be sacrificed. The mar- ginal costs of reducing pollution are generally increasing, because the least expensive 
and easiest reductions can be made first, leaving the more expen- sive methods for later. The marginal benefits of 
reducing pollution are gen- erally declining, because the steps that provide the greatest benefit can be taken first, 
and steps that provide less benefit can wait until later.

As society draws closer to Qb, some might argue that it becomes more important to use market-ori- ented environmental 
tools to hold down the costs of reducing pollution. Their objective would be to avoid environmental rules that would 
provide the quantity of environmental protection at Qc, where marginal costs exceed marginal benefits. The following 
Clear It Up feature delves into how the EPA measures its policies – and the monetary value of our lives.


WHAT’S A LIFE WORTH?

The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) must estimate the value of saving lives by reducing pollution against 
the

500                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 



additional costs. In measuring the benefits of government environmental policies, the EPA’s National Center for 
Environ- mental Economics (NCEE) values a statistical human life at $7.4 million (in 2006 U.S. dollars).
Economists value a human life on the basis of studies of the value that people actually place on human lives in their 
own decisions. For example, some jobs have a higher probability of death than others, and these jobs typically pay more 
to com- pensate for the risk. Examples are ocean fishery as opposed to fish farming, and ice trucking in Alaska as 
opposed to truck driving in the “lower forty-eight” states.
Government  regulators  use  estimates  such  as  these  when  deciding  what  proposed  regulations  are  
“reasonable,”  which means deciding which proposals have high enough benefits to justify their cost. For example, when 
the U.S. Department of Transportation makes decisions about what safety systems should be required in cars or 
airplanes, it will approve rules only where the estimated cost per life saved is $3 million or less.
Resources spent on life-saving regulations create tradeoff. A study by W. Kip Viscusi of Vanderbilt University 
estimated that when a regulation costs $50 million, it diverts enough spending in the rest of the economy from health 
care and safety expenditures that it costs a life. This finding suggests that any regulation that costs more than $50 
million per life saved actually costs lives, rather than saving them.


KEY CONCEPTS AND SUMMARY

We can make a strong case, taken as a whole, that the benefits of U.S. environmental regulation have outweighed the 
costs. As the extent of environment regulation increases, additional expenditures on environmental protection will 
probably have increasing marginal costs and decreasing marginal ben- efits. This pattern suggests that the flexibility 
and cost savings of market-oriented environmental poli- cies will become more important.

SELF-CHECK QUESTIONS



1.    Suppose a city releases 16 million gallons of raw sewage into a nearby lake. Table 11 shows the total costs of 
cleaning up the sewage to different levels, together with the total benefits of doing so. (Benefits include 
environmental, recreational, health, and industrial benefits.)

Total Cost (in tftousands of dollars)    Total Benefits (in tftousands of dollars)

16 million gallons    Current situation                                       Current situation
12 million gallons     50                                                                  800
8 million gallons       150                                                                1300
4 million gallons       500                                                                1650
0 gallons                     1200                                                             1900
Table 11.

a.    Using the information in Table 11, calculate the marginal costs and marginal benefits of reducing sewage 
emissions for this city. See Cost and Industry Structure if you need a refresher on how to calculate marginal costs.
b.    What is the optimal level of sewage for this city?
c.    Why not just pass a law that zero sewage can be emitted? After all, the total benefits of zero emissions exceed 
the total costs.

2.    The state of Colorado requires oil and gas companies who use fracking techniques to return the land to its

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   501




original condition after the oil and gas extractions. Table 12 shows the total cost and total benefits (in dollars) of 
this policy.

Land Restored (in acres)    Total Cost    Total Benefit

0                                                $0                   $0

100                                           $20                 $140

200                                           $80                 $240

300                                           $160               $320

400                                           $280               $380
Table 12.

a.    Calculate the marginal cost and the marginal benefit at each quantity (acre) of land restored. See Cost and 
Industry Structure if you need a refresher on how to calculate marginal costs and benefits.
b.    If we apply marginal analysis, what is the optimal amount of land to be restored?




REVIEW QUESTIONS



1.    As the extent of environmental protection expands, would you expect marginal costs of environmental protection to 
rise or fall? Why or why not?
2.    As the extent of environmental protection expands, would you expect the marginal benefits of environmental 
protection to rise or fall? Why or why not?



CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS



1.    From an economic perspective, is it sound policy to pursue a goal of zero pollution? Why or why not?
2.    Recycling is a relatively inexpensive solution to much of the environmental contamination from plastics, glass, 
and other waste materials. Is it a sound policy to make it mandatory for everybody to recycle?



PROBLEMS



A city currently emits 16 million gallons (MG) of raw sewage into a lake that is beside the city. Table 13 shows the 
total costs (TC) in thousands of dollars of cleaning up the sewage to different levels, together with the total 
benefits (TB) of doing so. Benefits include environmental, recreational, health, and industrial benefits.

502                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 




TC             TB
16 MG    Current    Current 12 MG    50              800
8 MG       150            1300
4 MG       500            1850
0 MG       1200          2000
Table 13.

a.    Using the information in Table 13 calculate the marginal costs and marginal benefits of reducing sewage emissions 
for this city.
b.    What is the optimal level of sewage for this city? How can you tell?



REFERENCES

Ryan, Dave. “New Report Shows Benefits of 1990 Clean Air Amendments Outweigh Costs by Four- to-One  Margin,”  press  
release,  November  16,  1999.  United  States  Environmental  Protection  Agency. Accessed December 19, 2013. 
http://www.epa.gov/oar/sect812/r-140.html.

National Center for Environmental Economics (NCEE). “Frequently Asked Questions on Mortality Risk   Valuation.”   
United   States   Environmental   Protection   Agency.   Accessed   December   19,   2013.
http://yosemite.epa.gov/ee/epa/eed.nsf/pages/MortalityRiskValuation.html#whatvalue            World Tourism  
Organization,  “Tourism  2020  Vision.”  Accessed  December  19,  2013.  http://www.world- 
tourism.org/market_research/facts/market_trends.htm.
Viscusi, Kip W. Fatal Tradeoffs: Public and Private Responsibilities for Risk. New York: Oxford University Press, 1995.

SOLUTIONS


Answers to Self-Cfteck Questions

1.                a.    See the answers in the following table. The marginal cost is calculated as the change in total 
cost divided by the change in quantity.


Total Cost (in tftousands of dollars) [marginal cost]
Total Benefits (in tftousands of dollars) [marginal benefit]


16 million gallons

12 million gallons

8 million gallons

4 million gallons

Current situation                                                         Current situation

50    [50]                                                                       800   [800]

150   [100]                                                                    1,300  [500]

500   [350]                                                                    1,850   [350]

0 gallons                 1,200   [700]                                                                   2,000   [150]
Table 14.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   503




b.    The “optimal” level of pollution is where the marginal benefits of reducing it are equal to the marginal cost. 
This is at four million gallons.
c.    Marginal analysis tells us if the marginal costs of cleanup are greater than the marginal benefit, society could 
use those resources more efficiently elsewhere in the economy.

2.                a.    See the next table for the answers, which were calculated using the traditional calculation of 
marginal cost equal to change in total cost divided by change in quantity.

Land Restored (in acres)    Total Cost [marginal cost]    Total Benefit [marginal benefit]

0                                                $0                                                 $0

100                                           $20 [0.2]                                      $140 [1.4]

200                                           $80 [0.6]                                      $240 [1]

300                                           $160 [0.8]                                   $320 [0.8]

400                                           $280 [1.2]                                   $480 [0.6]
Table 15.

b.    The optimal amount of restored land is 300 acres. Beyond this quantity the marginal costs are greater than the 
marginal benefits.
