


18.5  INTERNATIONAL  ENVIRONMENTAL  ISSUES



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Explain biodiversity

•    Analyze the partnership of high-income and low-income countries in efforts to address international externalities


any countries around the world have become more aware of the benefits of environmental protection. Yet even if most 
nations individually took steps to address their environmental issues, no nation acting alone can solve certain 
environmental problems which spill over
national  borders.  No  nation  by  itself  can  reduce  emissions  of  carbon  dioxide  and  other  gases  by enough  
to  solve  the  problem  of  global  warming—not  without  the  cooperation  of  other  nations. Another issue is the 
challenge of preserving biodiversity, which includes the full spectrum of animal and  plant  genetic  material.  
Although  a  nation  can  protect  biodiversity  within  its  own  borders,  no nation acting alone can protect 
biodiversity around the world. Global warming and biodiversity are examples of international externalities.

Bringing the nations of the world together to address environmental issues requires a difficult set of  negotiations  
between  countries  with  different  income  levels  and  different  sets  of  priorities.  If nations such as China, 
India, Brazil, Mexico, and others are developing their economies by burning vast amounts of fossil fuels or by 
stripping their forest and wildlife habitats, then the world’s high- income  countries  acting  alone  will  not  be  
able  to  reduce  greenhouse  gases.  However,  low-income countries, with some understandable exasperation, point out 
that high-income countries do not have much moral standing to lecture them on the necessities of putting environmental 
protection ahead of economic growth. After all, high-income countries have historically been the primary contributors 
to greenhouse warming by burning fossil fuels—and still are today. It is hard to tell people who are living in a 
low-income country, where adequate diet, health care, and education are lacking, that they should sacrifice an improved 
quality of life for a cleaner environment.

Can rich and poor countries come together to address global environmental spillovers? At the ini- tiative of the 
European Union and the most vulnerable developing nations, the Durban climate con- ference  in  December  2011  
launched  negotiations  to  develop  a  new  international  climate  change agreement that covers all countries. The 
agreement will take the form of an agreed upon outcome with  legal  force  applicable  to  all  parties.  According  to 
 the  EU,  the  goal  is  to  adopt  the  plan  in

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   505
2015 and implement it in 2020. For the agreement to work, the two biggest emitters of greenhouse gases—China and the 
United States—will have to sign on.
Visit this website to learn more about the European Commission.











If high-income countries want low-income countries to reduce their emissions of greenhouse gases, then the high-income 
countries may need to pay some of the costs. Perhaps some of these payments will happen through private markets; for 
example, some tourists from rich countries will pay hand- somely to vacation near the natural treasures of low-income 
countries. Perhaps some of the transfer of resources can happen through making modern pollution-control technology 
available to poorer countries.

The practical details of what such an international system might look like and how it would operate across 
international borders are forbiddingly complex. But it seems highly unlikely that some form of world government will 
impose a detailed system of environmental command-and-control regulation around the world. As a result, a decentralized 
and market-oriented approach may be the only practi- cal way to address international issues such as global warming and 
biodiversity.

KEY CONCEPTS AND SUMMARY

Certain global environmental issues, such as global warming and biodiversity, spill over national bor- ders and will 
need to be addressed with some form of international agreement.

SELF-CHECK QUESTIONS



Consider the case of global environmental problems that spill across international borders as a prisoner’s dilemma of 
the sort studied in Monopolistic Competition and Oligopoly. Say that there are two countries, A and B. Each country can 
choose whether to protect the environment, at a cost of 10, or not to protect it, at a cost of zero. If one country 
decides to protect the environment, there is a benefit of 16, but the benefit is divided equally between the two coun- 
tries. If both countries decide to protect the environment, there is a benefit of 32, which is divided equally between 
the two countries.

a.    In Table 16, fill in the costs, benefits, and total payoffs to the countries of the following decisions. Explain 
why, without some international agreement, they are likely to end up with neither country acting to protect the 
environment.

506                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 




Country B

Protect    Not Protect


Country A

Protect

Not Protect
Table 16.



REVIEW QUESTIONS



1.    What are the economic tradeoffs between low-income and high-income countries in international conferences on 
global environmental damage?
2.    What arguments do low-income countries make in international discussions of global environmental clean- up?



CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS



1.    Can extreme levels of pollution hurt the economic development of a high-income country? Why or why not?
2.    How can high-income countries benefit from covering much of the cost of reducing pollution created by low-income 
countries?



REFERENCES

European Union. “Durban Conference Delivers Breakthrough for Climate.” Press release. December 11,          2012.       
   Accessed          December          19,          2013.          http://europa.eu/rapid/press- 
release_MEMO-11-895_en.htm?locale=en.

GLOSSARY
biodiversity the full spectrum of animal and plant genetic material
international externalities externalities that cross national borders and that cannot be resolved by a single nation 
acting alone

SOLUTIONS


Answers to Self-Cfteck Questions

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   507
Country B
Protect                                                                                                     Not Protect

Country
Protect    Both A and B have a cost of 10 and a benefit of 16; each country has net = 6
A has a cost of 10 and a benefit of 8 (net = –2); B has a cost of 0 and a benefit of 8 ( net = 8)

A                  Not
Protect
A has a cost of 0 and a benefit of 8 (net = 8); B has a cost of 10 and a benefit of 8 (net = –2)
Both A and B have a zero cost and a zero benefit; each country has net = 0
Table 17.
Country B will reason this way: If A protects the environment, then we will have benefits of 6 if we act to protect the 
environment, but 8 if we do not, so we will not protect it. If A is not protecting the environment, we will have losses 
of 2 if we protect, but have zero if we do not protect, so again, we will not protect it. Country A will reason in a 
similar manner. The result is that both countries choose to not protect, even though they will achieve the largest 
social ben- efits—a combined benefit of 12 for the two countries—if they both choose to protect. Environmental treaties 
can be viewed as a way for countries to try to extricate themselves from this situation.



18.6  THE  TRADEOFF  BETWEEN  ECONOMIC  OUTPUT  AND ENVIRONMENTAL  PROTECTION



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Apply the production possibility frontier to evaluate the tradeoff between economic output and the environment
•    Interpret a graphic representation of the tradeoff between economic output and environmental protection



he tradeoff between economic output and the environment can be analyzed with a production possibility frontier (PPF) 
such as the one shown in Figure 1. At one extreme, at a choice like P, a country would be selecting a high level of 
economic output but very little environmental pro-
tection. At the other extreme, at a choice like T, a country would be selecting a high level of environ- mental 
protection but little economic output. According to the graph, an increase in environmental protection involves an 
opportunity cost of less economic output. No matter what their preferences, all  societies  should  wish  to  avoid  
choices  like  M,  which  are  productively  inefficient.  Efficiency requires that the choice should be on the 
production possibility frontier.

Economists do not have a great deal to say about the choice between P, Q, R, S and T in Figure 1, all of which lie 
along the production possibility frontier. Countries with low per capita gross domestic product (GDP), such as China, 
place a greater emphasis on economic output—which in turn helps to produce nutrition, shelter, health, education, and 
desirable consumer goods. Countries with higher income levels, where a greater share of people have access to the basic 
necessities of life, may be will- ing to place a relatively greater emphasis on environmental protection.

However, economists are united in their belief that an inefficient choice such as M is undesirable. Rather than 
choosing M, a nation could achieve either greater economic output with the same envi- ronmental  protection,  as  at  
point  Q,  or  greater  environmental  protection  with  the  same  level  of output, as at point S. The problem with 
command-and-control environmental laws is that they some- times  involve  a  choice  like  M.  Market-oriented  
environmental  tools  offer  a  mechanism  either  for providing either the same environmental protection at lower 
cost, or providing a greater degree of environmental protection for the same cost.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   509























Figure 1. The Tradeoff between Economic Output and Environmental Protection.  Each  society  will  have  to  weigh  its 
 own  values  and  decide whether it prefers a choice like P with more economic output and less environmental 
protection, or a choice like T with more environmental protection and less economic output.


KEYSTONE XL

So how would an economist respond to claims of environmental damage caused by the Keystone XL project? Clearly the 
environmental cost of oil spills would be considered a negative externality, but how many external costs would arise? 
And are these costs “too high” when measured against any potential for economic benefit?
As this chapter indicates, in deciding whether construction of the pipeline is a good idea, an economist would want to 
know not only about the marginal benefits resulting from the additional pipeline construction, but also the potential 
marginal costs—and especially the marginal external costs of the pipeline. Typically these come in the form of 
environmental impact statements, which are usually required for these kinds of projects. The most recent impact 
statement, released in March 2013 by the Nebraska Department of State, considered the possibility of fewer miles of 
pipeline going over the aquifer system and avoiding completely environmentally fragile areas; it indicated that “most 
resources” would not be harmed by construction of the pipeline.
As of press time, the Obama Administration has not approved construction of the Keystone XL project. While the eco- 
nomic benefits of additional oil in the United States may be fairly easily quantified, the social costs are not. It 
seems that, in a period of economic expansion, people want to err on the side of caution and estimate the marginal 
costs to be greater than the marginal benefits of additional oil generation. Those estimates may change, however, if 
the price of gasoline con- tinues to rise.


KEY CONCEPTS AND SUMMARY

Depending on their different income levels and political preferences, countries are likely to make dif- ferent choices 
about allocative efficiency—that is, the choice between economic output and environ-

510                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


mental protection along the production possibility frontier. However, all countries should prefer to make a choice that 
shows productive efficiency—that is, the choice is somewhere on the production possibility frontier rather than inside 
it. Revisit Choice in a World of Scarcity for more on these terms.

SELF-CHECK QUESTIONS



A country called Sherwood is very heavily covered with a forest of 50,000 trees. There are proposals to clear some of 
Sherwood’s forest and grow corn, but obtaining this additional economic output will have an environmental cost from 
reducing the number of trees. Table 18 shows possible combinations of economic output and environmental protec- tion.
Combos    Corn Busftels (tftousands)    Number of Trees (tftousands) P               9                                  
                5
Q               2                                                  30
R               7                                                  20
S                2                                                  40
T               6                                                  10
Table 18.

a.    Sketch a graph of a production possibility frontier with environmental quality on the horizontal axis, measured 
by the number of trees, and the quantity of economic output, measured in corn, on the vertical axis.
b.    Which choices display productive efficiency? How can you tell?
c.    Which choices show allocative efficiency? How can you tell?
d.    In the choice between T and R, decide which one is better. Why?
e.    In the choice between T and S, can you say which one is better, and why?
f.    If you had to guess, which choice would you think is more likely to represent a command-and-control environmental 
policy and which choice is more likely to represent a market-oriented environmental policy, choice Q or S? Why?



REVIEW QUESTIONS



1.    In the tradeoff between economic output and environmental protection, what do the combinations on the protection 
possibility curve represent?
2.    What does a point inside the production possibility frontier represent?




CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS



Technological innovations shift the production possibility curve. Look at graph you sketched for Self-Check Question 1 
Which types of technologies should a country promote? Should “clean” technologies be promoted over other tech- 
nologies? Why or why not?

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   511




PROBLEMS



In the Land of Purity, there is only one form of pollution, called “gunk.” Table 19 shows possible combinations of eco- 
nomic output and reduction of gunk, depending on what kinds of environmental regulations are chosen.

Combos    Eco Output    Gunk Cleaned Up J                800                   10%
K               500                   30%
L               600                   40%
M              400                   40%
N               100                   90%
Table 19.

a.    Sketch a graph of a production possibility frontier with environmental quality on the horizontal axis, measured 
by the percentage reduction of gunk, and with the quantity of economic output on the vertical axis.
b.    Which choices display productive efficiency? How can you tell?
c.    Which choices show allocative efficiency? How can you tell?
d.    In the choice between K and L, can you say which one is better and why?
e.    In the choice between K and N, can you say which one is better, and why?
f.    If you had to guess, which choice would you think is more likely to represent a command-and-control environmental 
policy and which choice is more likely to represent a market-oriented environmental policy, choice L or M? Why?



SOLUTIONS


Answear.s to Self-Cfteck Questions

b.    Of the choices provided, P, R, and S demonstrate productive efficiency. These are the choices on the production 
possibility frontier.
c.    Allocative efficiency is determined by the preferences—in this case by the preferences of society as expressed 
through government and other social institutions. Because you do not have information about these preferences, you 
really cannot say much about allocative efficiency.
d.    In the choice between T and R, R should clearly be preferred, because it has both more corn and more trees. This 
answer illustrates why productive efficiency is beneficial. Compared with choices inside the PPF, it means more of one 
or both goods.
e.    In the choice between T and S, it is not possible to say which choice is better. True, S is on the PPF and T is 
not—but that only addresses the issue of productive efficiency. If a society has a strong preference for economic 
output and places a lower value on trees, then allocative efficiency may lead to a choice of T over
S. Of course, the reverse could also be true, leading to a choice of S. Without information on society’s preferences to 
judge allocative efficiency, this question cannot be answered.
f.    Compared with command-and-control policies, market-oriented policies allow either more output with the same 
environmental protection or more environmental protection with the same level of output—or more

512                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 
























Figure 2.


of both environmental protection and output. Thus, a choice like Q inside the PPF is more likely to represent a 
command-and-control policy demand than a choice like S on the frontier of the PPF.
