


19.2  HOW  GOVERNMENTS  CAN  ENCOURAGE  INNOVATION



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Explain the effects of intellectual property rights on social and private rates of return.

•    Identify three U.S. Government policies and explain how they encourage innovation



number of different government policies can increase the incentives to innovate, including: guaranteeing intellectual 
property rights, government assistance with the costs of research and development, and cooperative research ventures 
between universities and companies.

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS

One  way  to  increase  new  technology  is  to  guarantee  the  innovator  an  exclusive  right  to  that  new product 
or process. Intellectual property rights include patents, which give the inventor the exclu- sive legal right to make, 
use, or sell the invention for a limited time, and copyright laws, which give the author an exclusive legal right over 
works of literature, music, film/video, and pictures. For example, if a pharmaceutical firm has a patent on a new drug, 
then no other firm can manufacture or sell that drug for twenty-one years, unless the firm with the patent grants 
permission. Without a patent, the pharmaceutical firm would have to face competition for any successful products, and 
could earn no more than a normal rate of profit. With a patent, a firm is able to earn monopoly profits on its product 
for a period of time—which offers an incentive for research and development. In general, how long can “a period of 
time” be? The Clear it Up discusses patent and copyright protection timeframes for some works you might have heard of.


HOW LONG IS MICKEY MOUSE PROTECTED FROM BEING COPIED?

All patents and copyrights are scheduled to end someday. In 2003, copyright protection for Mickey Mouse was scheduled 
to run out. Once the copyright had expired, anyone would be able to copy Mickey Mouse cartoons or draw and sell new 
ones. In 1998, however, Congress passed the Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act. For copyrights owned by com- 
panies or other entities, it increased or extended the copyright from 75 years to 95 years after publication. For 
copyrights owned by individuals, it increased or extended the copyright coverage from 50 years to 70 years after death. 
Along with protecting Mickey for another 20 years, the copyright extension affected about 400,000 books, movies, and 
songs.

Figure 1 illustrates how the total number of patent applications filed with the U.S. Patent and Trade-

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   527
mark Office, as well as the total number of patents granted, surged in the mid-1990s with the inven- tion of the 
Internet, and is still going strong today.




















Figure 1. Patents Filed and Granted, 1981–2012. The number of applications filed for patents increased sub- stantially 
from the mid-1990s into the first years of the 2000s, due in part to the invention of the Internet, which   has   led   
to   many   other   inventions   and   to   the   1998   Copyright   Term   Extension   Act.   (Source: 
http://www.uspto.gov/web/offices/ac/ido/oeip/taf/us_stat.htm)

While patents provide an incentive to innovate by protecting the innovator, they are not perfect. For example:

•   In countries that already have patents, economic studies show that inventors receive only one-third to one-half of 
the total economic value of their inventions.
•   In a fast-moving high-technology industry like biotechnology or semiconductor design, patents may be almost 
irrelevant because technology is advancing so quickly.
•   Not every new idea can be protected with a patent or a copyright—for example, a new way of organizing a factory or 
a new way of training employees.
•   Patents may sometimes cover too much or be granted too easily. In the early 1970s, Xerox had received over 1,700 
patents on various elements of the photocopy machine. Every time Xerox improved the photocopier, it received a patent 
on the improvement.
•   The 21-year time period for a patent is somewhat arbitrary. Ideally, a patent should cover a long enough period of 
time for the inventor to earn a good return, but not so long that it allows the inventor to charge a monopoly price 
permanently.

Because patents are imperfect and do not apply well to all situations, alternative methods of improv- ing the rate of 
return for inventors of new technology are desirable. Some of these possible alternative policies are described in the 
following sections.

528                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 

POLICY #1: GOVERNMENT SPENDING ON RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

If the private sector does not have sufficient incentive to carry out research and development, one possibility is for 
the government to fund such work directly. Government spending can provide direct financial support for research and 
development (R&D) done at colleges and universities, nonprofit research entities, and sometimes by private firms, as 
well as at government-run laboratories. While government spending on research and development produces technology that 
is broadly available for firms to use, it costs taxpayers money and can sometimes be directed more for political than 
for sci- entific or economic reasons.

Visit the NASA website and the USDA website to read about government research that would not take place where it left 
to firms due to the externalities.












The first column of Table 5 shows the sources of total U.S. spending on research and development; the second column 
shows the total dollars of R&D funding by each source. The third column shows that, relative to the total amount of 
funding, 26% comes from the federal government, about 67% of R&D is done by industry, and less than 3% is done by 
universities and colleges. (The percentages below do not add up to exactly 100% due to rounding.)

Sources of R&D Funding                                       Amount ($ billions)                                Percent 
of tfte Total Federal government                                                $133.6                                  
                        32%
Industry                                                                       $249                                     
                        60.2%
Universities and colleges                                         $12.5                                                 
           3%
Nonprofits                                                                   $15.1                                      
                      3.6%
Nonfederal government                                          $3.8                                                     
         0.91%
Total                                                                               $414
Table 5. U.S. Research and Development Expenditures, 2011. (Source: http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/infbrief/nsf13313/)

In the 1960s the federal government paid for about two-thirds of the nation’s R&D. Over time, the
U.S. economy has come to rely much more heavily on industry-funded R&D. The federal govern- ment has tried to focus its 
direct R&D spending on areas where private firms are not as active. One difficulty  with  direct  government  support  
of  R&D  is  that  it  inevitably  involves  political  decisions about which projects are worthy. The scientific 
question of whether research is worthwhile can easily become  entangled  with  considerations  like  the  location  of  
the  congressional  district  in  which  the research funding is being spent.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   529

POLICY #2: TAX BREAKS FOR RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

A complementary approach to supporting R&D that does not involve the government’s close scrutiny of specific projects 
is to give firms a reduction in taxes depending on how much research and devel- opment they do. The federal government 
refers to this policy as the research and experimentation (R&E) tax credit. According to the Treasury Department: “. . 
. the R&E Credit is also a cost-effective policy for stimulating additional private sector investment. Most recent 
studies find that each dollar of foregone tax revenue through the R&E Tax Credit causes firms to invest at least a 
dollar in R&D, with some studies finding a benefit to cost ratio of 2 or 2.96.”

Visit this website for more information on how the R&E Tax Credit encourages investment.












POLICY #3 COOPERATIVE RESEARCH

State and federal governments support research in a variety of ways. For example, United for Medical Research,  a  
coalition  of  groups  that  seek  funding  for  the  National Institutes of Healtft,  (which  is supported  by  
federal  grants),  states:  “NIH-supported  research  added  $69  billion  to  our  GDP  and supported seven million 
jobs in 2011 alone.” The United States remains the leading sponsor of med- ical-related research spending $117 billion 
in 2011. Other institutions, such as the National Academy of Scientists and the National Academy of Engineers, receive 
federal grants for innovative projects. The Agriculture and Food Researcft Initiative (AFRI) at the United States 
Department of Agricul- ture awards federal grants to projects that apply the best science to the most important 
agricultural problems, from food safety to childhood obesity. Cooperation between government-funded universi- ties, 
academies, and the private sector can spur product innovation and create whole new industries.

KEY CONCEPTS AND SUMMARY

Public policy with regard to technology must often strike a balance. For example, patents provide an incentive for 
inventors, but they should be limited to genuinely new inventions and not extend for- ever.

Government has a variety of policy tools for increasing the rate of return for new technology and encouraging its 
development, including: direct government funding of R&D, tax incentives for R&D, protection of intellectual property, 
and forming cooperative relationships between universities and the private sector.

530                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 



SELF-CHECK QUESTIONS



1.    When a neighborhood is cleaned up and kept neat, there are a number of positive spillovers: higher property 
values, less crime, happier residents. What types of government policies can encourage neighborhoods to clean up?
2.    Education provides both private benefits to those who receive it and broader social benefits for the economy as a 
whole. Think about the types of policies a government can follow to address the issue of positive spillovers in 
technology and then suggest a parallel set of policies that governments could follow for addressing positive 
externalities in education.



REVIEW QUESTIONS



1.    Why might private markets tend to provide too few incentives for the development of new technology?
2.    What can government do to encourage the development of new technology?




CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS



Is it inevitable that government must become involved in supporting investments in new technology?



PROBLEMS



The marginal private costs and the marginal private benefits of a firm producing fuel-efficient cars is represented in 
the following diagram (show the equilibrium Pmarket, Qmarket). The government would like to increase the amount of 
fuel-efficient cars to be produced and sold to Qsocial. One way that the government can try to increase production of 
fuel-efficient cars is by making them cheaper to produce, by subsidizing their production. Show, on the same graph, the 
amount of subsidy needed to increase the equilibrium quantity of fuel-efficient cars to Qsocial. Hint: the government 
is
trying to affect production through costs, not benefits.


REFERENCES

United  States  Department  of  the  Treasury.  “Research  and  Experimentation  Tax  Credit.”  Accessed November   
2013.   http://www.treasury.gov/press-center/news/Pages/investing-in-us-competitive- ness.aspx.

U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. 2015. “U.S. Patent Statistics: Calendar Years 1963–2014.” Accessed April 10, 2015. 
http://www.uspto.gov/web/offices/ac/ido/oeip/taf/us_stat.pdf.

United for Medical Research. “Profiles of Prosperity: How NIH-Supported Research Is Fueling Pri- vate  Sector  Growth  
and  Innovation.”  Introduction.  Accessed  January  2014.  http://www.united- 
formedicalresearch.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/UMR_ProsperityReport_071913a.pdf.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   531


GLOSSARY
intellectual property the body of law including patents, trademarks, copyrights, and trade secret law that protect the 
right of inventors to produce and sell their inventions

SOLUTIONS


Answers to Self-Cfteck Questions

1.    Government programs that either pay for neighborhood clean-up directly or that provide reduced tax payments for 
those who clean up or fix up their own property could be enacted. It is also easy to imagine how a city might allow its 
businesses to form a group that would pay for and manage neighborhood cleanup.
2.    Government programs that either pay for education directly or that provide loans or reduced tax payments for 
education could create positive spillovers. A city might allow its businesses to form a group that would coordinate 
business efforts with schools and local colleges and universities—allowing students to obtain real-world experience in 
their chosen fields and providing businesses with enthusiastic, trained workers.
