


20.3  THE  SAFETY  NET



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Identify the antipoverty government programs that compose the safety net

•    Explain the primary goals of the safety net programs and how these programs have changed over time

•    Discuss the complexities of these safety net programs and why they can be controversial



he U.S. government has implemented a number of programs to assist those below the poverty line and those who have 
incomes just above the poverty line, who are referred to as the near- poor. Such programs are called the safety net, in 
recognition of the fact that they offer some
protection for those who find themselves without jobs or income.

TEMPORARY ASSISTANCE FOR NEEDY FAMILIES

From the Great Depression of the 1930s until 1996, the United States’ most visible antipoverty pro- gram  was  Aid  to  
Families  witft  Dependent  Cftildren  (AFDC),  which  provided  cash  payments  to mothers with children who were 
below the poverty line. This program was often just called “welfare.” In 1996, Congress passed and President Bill 
Clinton signed into law the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act, more commonly called the 
“welfare reform act.” The new law replaced AFDC with Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF).

Visit this website to watch a video of President Bill Clinton’s Welfare Reform speech.












TANF  brought  several  dramatic  changes  in  how  welfare  operated.  Under  the  old  AFDC  program, states set the 
level of welfare benefits that they would pay to the poor, and the federal government

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   559

guaranteed it would chip in some of the money as well. The federal government’s welfare spending would rise or fall 
depending on the number of poor people, and on how each state set its own welfare contribution.

Under TANF, however, the federal government gives a fixed amount of money to each state. The state can then use the 
money for almost any program with an antipoverty component: for example, the state might use the money to give cash to 
poor families, or to reduce teenage pregnancy, or even to raise the high school graduation rate. However, the federal 
government imposed two key require- ments. First, if states are to keep receiving the TANF grants, they must impose 
work requirements so that most of those receiving TANF benefits are working (or attending school). Second, no one can 
receive TANF benefits with federal money for more than a total of five years over his or her lifetime. The old AFDC 
program had no such work requirements or time limits.

TANF attempts to avoid the poverty trap by requiring that welfare recipients work and by limiting the length of time 
they can receive benefits. In its first few years, the program was quite successful. The number of families receiving 
payments in 1995, the last year of AFDC, was 4.8 million. By 2012, according to the Congressional Research Service, the 
average number of families receiving payments under TANF was 1.8 million—a decline of more than half.

TANF  benefits  to  poor  families  vary  considerably  across  states.  For  example,  again  according  to the  
Congressional  Research  Service,  in  2011  the  highest  monthly  payment  in  Alaska  to  a  single mother with two 
children was $923, while in Mississippi the highest monthly payment to that family was $170. These payments reflect 
differences in states’ cost of living. Total spending on TANF was approximately $16.6 billion in 1997. As of 2012, 
spending was at $12 billion, an almost 28% decrease, split about evenly between the federal and state governments. When 
you take into account the effects of inflation, the decline is even greater. Moreover, there seemed little evidence 
that poor families were suffering a reduced standard of living as a result of TANF—although, on the other side, there 
was not much evidence that poor families had greatly improved their total levels of income, either.

THE EARNED INCOME TAX CREDIT (EITC)
The earned income tax credit (EITC), first passed in 1975, is a method of assisting the working poor through the tax 
system. The EITC is one of the largest assistance program for low-income groups, and projections for 2013 expected 26 
million households to take advantage of it at an estimated cost of $50 billion. In 2013, for example, a single parent 
with two children would have received a tax credit of $5,372 up to an income level of $17,530. The amount of the tax 
break increases with the amount of income earned, up to a point. The earned income tax credit has often been popular 
with both econo- mists and the general public because of the way it effectively increases the payment received for 
work.

What about the danger of the poverty trap that every additional $1 earned will reduce government support payments by 
close to $1? To minimize this problem, the earned income tax credit is phased out slowly. According to the Tax Policy 
Center, for a single-parent family with two children in 2013, the credit is not reduced at all (but neither is it 
increased) as earnings rise from $13,430 to $17,530. Then, for every $1 earned above $17,530, the amount received from 
the credit is reduced by 21.06 cents, until the credit phases out completely at an income level of $46,227.

Figure 1 illustrates that the earned income tax credits, child tax credits, and the TANF program all

560                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 

cost the federal government money—either in direct outlays or in loss of tax revenues. CTC stands for the government 
tax cuts for the child tax credit.






















Figure 1. Real Federal Spending on CTC, EITC, and TANF, 1975-2013. EITC increased from more than  $20  billion  in  
2000  to  over  an  estimated  $50  billion  by  2013,  far  exceeding  estimated  2013 outlays in the CTC (Child Tax 
Credits) and TANF of over $20 billion and $10 billion, respectively. (Source: Office of Management and Budget)

In recent years, the EITC has become a hugely expensive government program for providing income assistance to the poor 
and near-poor, costing about $60 billion in 2012. In that year, the EITC pro- vided benefits to about 27 million 
families and individuals and, on average, is worth about $2,296 per family (with children), according to the Tax Policy 
Center. One reason that the TANF law worked as well as it did is that the EITC was greatly expanded in the late 1980s 
and again in the early 1990s, which increased the returns to work for low-income Americans.

SUPPLEMENTAL NUTRITION ASSISTANCE PROGRAM (SNAP)
Often  called  “food  stamps,”  Supplemental  Nutrition  Assistance  Program  (SNAP)  is  a  federally funded program, 
started in 1964, in which each month poor people receive a card like a debit card that they can use to buy food. The 
amount of food aid for which a household is eligible varies by income, number of children, and other factors but, in 
general, households are expected to spend about 30% of their own net income on food, and if 30% of their net income is 
not enough to purchase a nutrition- ally adequate diet, then those households are eligible for SNAP.

SNAP can contribute to the poverty trap. For every $100 earned, the government assumes that a fam- ily can spend $30 
more for food, and thus reduces its eligibility for food aid by $30. This decreased benefit is not a complete 
disincentive to work—but combined with how other programs reduce ben- efits as income increases, it adds to the 
problem. SNAP, however, does try to address the poverty trap with its own set of work requirements and time limits.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   561

Why give debit cards and not just cash? Part of the political support for SNAP comes from a belief that since the cards 
must be spent on food, they cannot be “wasted” on other forms of consumption. From an economic point of view, however, 
the belief that cards must increase spending on food seems wrong-headed. After all, say that a poor family is spending 
$2,500 per year on food, and then it starts receiving $1,000 per year in SNAP aid. The family might react by spending 
$3,500 per year on food (income plus aid), or it might react by continuing to spend $2,500 per year on food, but use 
the $1,000 in food aid to free up $1,000 that can now be spent on other goods. So it is reasonable to think of SNAP 
cards as an alternative method, along with TANF and the earned income tax credit, of trans- ferring income to the 
working poor.

Indeed, anyone eligible for TANF is also eligible for SNAP, although states can expand eligibility for food aid if they 
wish to do so. In some states, where TANF welfare spending is relatively low, a poor family may receive more in support 
from SNAP than from TANF. In 2014, about 40 million people received food aid at an annual cost of about $76 billion, 
with an average monthly benefit of about
$287 per person per month. SNAP participation increased by 70% between 2007 and 2011, from 26.6 million participants to 
45 million. According to the Congressional Budget Office, this dramatic rise in participation was caused by the Great 
Recession of 2008–2009 and rising food prices.

The federal government deploys a range of income security programs that are funded through depart- ments such as Health 
and Human Services, Agriculture, and Housing and Urban Development (HUD) (see Figure 2). According to the Office of 
Management and Budget, collectively, these three depart- ments provided an estimated $62 billion of aid through 
programs such as supplemental feeding pro- grams for women and children, subsidized housing, and energy assistance. The 
federal government also transfers funds to individual states through special grant programs.

The  safety  net  includes  a  number  of  other  programs:  government-subsidized  school  lunches  and breakfasts  
for  children  from  low-income  families;  the  Special  Supplemental  Food  Program  for Women, Infants and Cftildren 
(WIC), which provides food assistance for pregnant women and new- borns; the Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program, 
which provides help with home heating bills; housing assistance, which helps pay the rent; and Supplemental Security 
Income, which provides cash support for the disabled and the elderly poor.

MEDICAID
Medicaid was created by Congress in 1965 and is a joint health insurance program entered into by both the states and 
the federal government. The federal government helps fund Medicaid, but each state is responsible for administering the 
program, determining the level of benefits, and determin- ing eligibility. It provides medical insurance for certain 
low-income people, including those below the poverty line, with a focus on families with children, the elderly, and the 
disabled. About one-third of Medicaid spending is for low-income mothers with children. While an increasing share of 
the pro- gram funding in recent years has gone to pay for nursing home costs for the elderly poor. The pro- gram 
ensures that a basic level of benefits is provided to Medicaid participants, but because each state sets eligibility 
requirements and provides varying levels of service, the program differs from state to state.

In the past, a common problem has been that many low-paying jobs pay enough to a breadwinner so that a family could 
lose its eligibility for Medicaid, yet the job does not offer health insurance benefits. A poor parent considering such 
a job might choose not to work rather than lose health insurance for

562                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 



























Figure 2. Expenditure Comparison of TANF, SNAP, HUD, and Other Income Security Programs,  1988–2013  (est.).  Total  
expenditures  on  income  security  continued  to  rise between 1988 and 2010, while payments for TANF have increased 
from $13 billion in 1998 to an estimated $17.3 billion in 2013. SNAP has seen relatively small increments. These two 
programs comprise a relatively small portion of the estimated $106 billion dedicated to income security in 2013. Note 
that other programs and housing programs increased dramatically during the 2008 and 2010 time periods. (Source: Table 
12.3 Sec- tion  600  Income  Security,  https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/bud- 
get/fy2013/assets/hist.pdf)

his or her children. In this way, health insurance can become a part of the poverty trap. Many states recognized this 
problem in the 1980s and 1990s and expanded their Medicaid coverage to include not just the poor, but the near-poor 
earning up to 135% or even 185% of the poverty line. Some states also guaranteed that children would not lose coverage 
if their parents worked.

These expanded guarantees cost the government money, of course, but they also helped to encourage those on welfare to 
enter the labor force. As of 2014, approximately 69.7 million people participated in Medicaid. Of those enrolled, 
almost half are children. Healthcare expenditures, however, are high- est for the elderly population, which comprises 
approximately 25% of participants. As Figure 3 (a) indicates, the largest number of households that enroll in Medicaid 
are those with children. Lower- income adults are the next largest group enrolled in Medicaid at 28%. The blind and 
disabled are 16% of those enrolled, and seniors are 9% of those enrolled. Figure 3 (b) shows how much actual Medicaid 
dollars are spent for each group. Out of total Medicaid spending, more is spent on seniors (20%) and the blind and 
disabled (44%). So, 64% of all Medicaid spending goes to seniors, the blind, and disabled. Children receive 21% of all 
Medicaid spending, followed by adults at 15%.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   563


















Figure 3. Medicaid Enrollment and Spending. Part (a) shows the Medicaid enrollment by different populations, with 
children comprising the largest percentage at 47%, followed by adults at 28%, and the blind and disabled at 16%. Part 
(b) shows that Medicaid spending is principally for the blind and disabled, followed by the elderly. Although children 
are the largest population covered by Medicaid, expenditures on children are only at 21%.

KEY CONCEPTS AND SUMMARY

The group of government programs that assist the poor are called the safety net. In the United States, prominent safety 
net programs include Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF), the Supple- mental Nutrition Assistance Program 
(SNAP), the earned income tax credit (EITC), Medicaid, and the Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants, 
and Children (WIC).

SELF-CHECK QUESTIONS



1.    We have discovered that the welfare system discourages recipients from working because the more income they earn, 
the less welfare benefits they receive. How does the earned income tax credit attempt to loosen the poverty trap?
2.    How does the TANF attempt to loosen the poverty trap?




REVIEW QUESTIONS



1.    Who are the near-poor?
2.    What is the safety net?
3.    Briefly explain the differences between TANF, the earned income tax credit, SNAP, and Medicaid.

564                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 



CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS



1.    Many critics of government programs to help low-income individuals argue that these programs create a poverty 
trap. Explain how programs such as TANF, EITC, SNAP, and Medicaid will affect low-income individuals and whether or not 
you think these programs will benefit families and children.
2.    Think about the business cycle: during a recession, unemployment increases; it decreases in an expansionary 
phase. Explain what happens to TANF, SNAP, and Medicaid programs at each phase of the business cycle (recession, 
trough, expansion, and peak).



REFERENCES

Congressional Budget Office. 2015. “The Effects of Potential Cuts in SNAP Spending on Households With  Different  
Amounts  of  Income.”  Accessed  April  13,  2015.  https://www.cbo.gov/publication/ 49978.

Falk, Gene. Congressional Research Service. “The Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) Block   Grant:   
Responses   to   Frequently   Asked   Questions.”   Last   modified   October   17,   2013. 
http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/RL32760.pdf.

Library of Congress. “Congressional Research Service.” http://www.loc.gov/crsinfo/about/.

Office of Management and Budget. “Fiscal Year 2013 Historical Tables: Budget of the U.S. Govern- ment.” 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/budget/fy2013/assets/hist.pdf.

Tax Policy Center: Urban Institute and Brookings Institution. “The Tax Policy Briefing Book: Taxa- tion and the Family: 
What is the Earned Income Tax Credit?” http://www.taxpolicycenter.org/brief- ing-book/key-elements/family/eitc.cfm.

GLOSSARY
earned income tax credit (EITC) a method of assisting the working poor through the tax system Medicaid a federal–state 
joint program enacted in 1965 that provides medical insurance for certain (not all) low-income people, including the 
near-poor as well as those below the poverty line, and focusing on low-income families with children, the low-income 
elderly, and the disabled
near-poor those who have incomes just above the poverty line
safety net the group of government programs that provide assistance to the poor and the near-poor Supplemental 
Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) a federally funded program, started in 1964, in which each month poor people 
receive SNAP cards they can use to buy food

SOLUTIONS


Answers to Self-Cfteck Questions

1.    The earned income tax credit works like this: a poor family receives a tax break that increases according to how 
much they work. Families that work more get more. In that sense it loosens the poverty trap by

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   565
encouraging work. As families earn above the poverty level, the earned income tax credit is gradually reduced. For 
those near-poor families, the earned income tax credit is a partial disincentive to work.
2.    TANF attempts to loosen the poverty trap by providing incentives to work in other ways. Specifically, it requires 
that people work (or complete their education) as a condition of receiving TANF benefits, and it places a time limit on 
benefits.
