


20.5  GOVERNMENT  POLICIES  TO  REDUCE  INCOME  INEQUALITY



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Explain the arguments for and against government intervention in a market economy

•    Identify beneficial ways to reduce the economic inequality in a society

•    Show the tradeoff between incentives and income equality



o society should expect or desire complete equality of income at a given point in time, for a number of reasons. First, 
most workers receive relatively low earnings in their first few jobs, higher earnings as they reach middle age, and 
then lower earnings after retirement. Thus, a
society with people of varying ages will have a certain amount of income inequality. Second, people’s preferences and 
desires differ. Some are willing to work long hours to have income for large houses, fast cars and computers, luxury 
vacations, and the ability to support children and grandchildren.

These  factors  all  imply  that  a  snapshot  of  inequality  in  a  given  year  does  not  provide  an  accurate 
picture of how people’s incomes rise and fall over time. Even if some degree of economic inequality is expected at any 
point in time, how much inequality should there be? There is also the difference between income and wealth, as the 
following Clear It Up feature explains.


HOW DO YOU MEASURE WEALTH VERSUS INCOME INEQUALITY?

Income is a flow of money received, often measured on a monthly or an annual basis; wealtft is the sum of the value of 
all assets, including money in bank accounts, financial investments, a pension fund, and the value of a home. In 
calculat- ing wealth all debts must be subtracted, such as debt owed on a home mortgage and on credit cards. A retired 
person, for example, may have relatively little income in a given year, other than a pension or Social Security. 
However, if that person has saved and invested over time, the person’s accumulated wealth can be quite substantial.
In the United States, the wealth distribution is more unequal than the income distribution, because differences in 
income can accumulate over time to make even larger differences in wealth. However, the degree of inequality in the 
wealth dis- tribution can be measured with the same tools we use to measure the inequality in the income distribution, 
like quintile measurements. Data on wealth are collected once every three years in the Survey of Consumer Finance.

Even if they cannot answer the question of how much inequality is too much, economists can still play an important role 
in spelling out policy options and tradeoffs. If a society decides to reduce the level of economic inequality, it has 
three main sets of tools: redistribution from those with high incomes to

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   579

those with low incomes; trying to assure that a ladder of opportunity is widely available; and a tax on inheritance.

REDISTRIBUTION

Redistribution means taking income from those with higher incomes and providing income to those with lower incomes. 
Earlier in this chapter, we considered some of the key government policies that provide support for the poor: the 
welfare program TANF, the earned income tax credit, SNAP, and Medicaid. If a reduction in inequality is desired, these 
programs could receive additional funding.

The  programs  are  paid  for  through  the  federal  income  tax,  which  is  a  progressive  tax  system designed in 
such a way that the rich pay a higher percent in income taxes than the poor. Data from household income tax returns in 
2009 shows that the top 1% of households had an average income of $1,219,700 per year in pre-tax income and paid an 
average federal tax rate of 28.9%. The effective income tax, which is total taxes paid divided by total income (all 
sources of income such as wages, profits, interest, rental income, and government transfers such as veterans’ 
benefits), was much lower. The effective tax paid by the top 1% of householders was 20.4%, while the bottom two 
quintiles actu- ally  paid  negative  effective  income  taxes,  because  of  provisions  like  the  earned  income  
tax  credit. News stories occasionally report on a high-income person who has managed to pay very little in taxes, but 
while such individual cases exist, according to the Congressional Budget Office, the typical pat- tern is that people 
with higher incomes pay a higher average share of their income in federal income taxes.

Of course, the fact that some degree of redistribution occurs now through the federal income tax and government 
antipoverty programs does not settle the questions of how much redistribution is appro- priate, and whether more 
redistribution should occur.

THE LADDER OF OPPORTUNITY

Economic inequality is perhaps most troubling when it is not the result of effort or talent, but instead is determined 
by the circumstances under which a child grows up. One child attends a well-run grade school and high school and heads 
on to college, while parents help out by supporting education and other interests, paying for college, a first car, and 
a first house, and offering work connections that lead to internships and jobs. Another child attends a poorly run 
grade school, barely makes it through a low-quality high school, does not go to college, and lacks family and peer 
support. These two chil- dren may be similar in their underlying talents and in the effort they put forth, but their 
economic outcomes are likely to be quite different.

Public policy can attempt to build a ladder of opportunities so that, even though all children will never come from 
identical families and attend identical schools, each child has a reasonable opportu- nity to attain an economic niche 
in society based on their interests, desires, talents, and efforts. Some of those initiatives include those shown in 
Table 13.

580                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


Cftildren                     College Level                                                                         
Adults

• Improved day care
• Enrichment programs for preschoolers
• Widespread loans and grants for those in financial need
• Public support for a range of institutions from two-year community colleges to large research universities
• Opportunities for retraining and acquiring new skills
• Prohibiting discrimination in job markets and housing on the basis of race, gender, age, and disability
• Improved public
schools                         –                                                                                       
          –
• After school and
community                 –                                                                                             
    –
activities
• Internships and
apprenticeships          –                                                                                              
   –
Table 13. Public Policy Initiatives

The United States has often been called a land of opportunity. Although the general idea of a ladder of opportunity for 
all citizens continues to exert a powerful attraction, specifics are often quite contro- versial. Society can 
experiment with a wide variety of proposals for building a ladder of opportunity, especially for those who otherwise 
seem likely to start their lives in a disadvantaged position. Such policy experiments need to be carried out in a 
spirit of open-mindedness, because some will succeed while others will not show positive results or will cost too much 
to enact on a widespread basis.

INHERITANCE TAXES

There is always a debate about inheritance taxes. It goes like this: On the one hand, why should people who  have 
worked  hard all  their lives  and  saved  up a substantial  nest  egg  not  be  able  to give their money and 
possessions to their children and grandchildren? In particular, it would seem un-Ameri- can if children were unable to 
inherit a family business or a family home. On the other hand, many Americans are far more comfortable with inequality 
resulting from high-income people who earned their money by starting innovative new companies than they are with 
inequality resulting from high- income people who have inherited money from rich parents.

The  United  States  does  have  an  estate  tax—that  is,  a  tax  imposed  on  the  value  of  an  inheri- 
tance—which suggests a willingness to limit how much wealth can be passed on as an inheritance. However, according to 
the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, in 2015 the estate tax applied only to those leaving inheritances of more 
than $5.43 million and thus applies to only a tiny percentage of those with high levels of wealth.

THE TRADEOFF BETWEEN INCENTIVES AND INCOME EQUALITY

Government policies to reduce poverty or to encourage economic equality, if carried to extremes, can injure incentives 
for economic output. The poverty trap, for example, defines a situation where guar- anteeing a certain level of income 
can eliminate or reduce the incentive to work. An extremely high degree of redistribution, with very high taxes on the 
rich, would be likely to discourage work and entrepreneurship. Thus, it is common to draw the tradeoff between economic 
output and equality, as shown in Figure 1 (a). In this formulation, if society wishes a high level of economic output, 
like point A, it must also accept a high degree of inequality. Conversely, if society wants a high level of equality,

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   581

like point B, it must accept a lower level of economic output because of reduced incentives for pro- duction.

This view of the tradeoff between economic output and equality may be too pessimistic, and Figure 1
(b) presents an alternate vision. Here, the tradeoff between economic output and equality first slopes up, in the 
vicinity of choice C, suggesting that certain programs might increase both output and eco- nomic equality. For example, 
the policy of providing free public education has an element of redistri- bution, since the value of the public 
schooling received by children of low-income families is clearly higher than what low-income families pay in taxes. A 
well-educated population, however, is also an enormously powerful factor in providing the skilled workers of tomorrow 
and helping the economy to grow and expand. In this case, equality and economic growth may complement each other.

Moreover, policies to diminish inequality and soften the hardship of poverty may sustain political support  for  a  
market  economy.  After  all,  if  society  does  not  make  some  effort  toward  reducing inequality and poverty, the 
alternative might be that people would rebel against market forces. Citi- zens might seek economic security by 
demanding that their legislators pass laws forbidding employ- ers from ever laying off workers or reducing wages, or 
laws that would impose price floors and price ceilings and shut off international trade. From this viewpoint, policies 
to reduce inequality may help economic output by building social support for allowing markets to operate.

















Figure  1.  The  Tradeoff  between  Incentives  and  Economic  Equality.  (a)  Society  faces  a  trade-off  where  any 
attempt to move toward greater equality, like moving from choice A to B, involves a reduction in economic out- put. (b) 
Situations can arise like point C, where it is possible both to increase equality and also to increase eco- nomic  
output,  to a choice like D. It may also  be  possible  to increase  equality  with  little  impact  on economic 
output, like the movement from choice D to E. However, at some point, too aggressive a push for equality will tend to 
reduce economic output, as in the shift from E to F.

The tradeoff in Figure 1 (b) then flattens out in the area between points D and E, which reflects the pattern that a 
number of countries that provide similar levels of income to their citizens—the United States, Canada, the nations of 
the European Union, Japan, Australia—have different levels of inequal- ity.  The  pattern  suggests  that  countries  
in  this  range  could  choose  a  greater  or  a  lesser  degree  of inequality without much impact on economic 
output. Only if these countries push for a much higher level of equality, like at point F, will they experience the 
diminished incentives that lead to lower levels of economic output. In this view, while a danger always exists that an 
agenda to reduce poverty or

582                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


inequality can be poorly designed or pushed too far, it is also possible to discover and design poli- cies that improve 
equality and do not injure incentives for economic output by very much—or even improve such incentives.


OCCUPY WALL STREET

The Occupy movement took on a life of its own over the last few months of 2011, bringing to light issues faced by many 
people on the lower end of the income distribution. The contents of this chapter indicate that there is a significant 
amount of income inequality in the United States. The question is: What should be done about it?
The Great Recession of 2008–2009 caused unemployment to rise and incomes to fall. Many people attribute the recession 
to mismanagement of the financial system by bankers and financial managers—those in the 1% of the income distribu- 
tion—but those in lower quintiles bore the greater burden of the recession through unemployment. This seemed to present 
the picture of inequality in a different light: the group that seemed responsible for the recession was not the group 
that seemed to bear the burden of the decline in output. A burden shared can bring a society closer together; a burden 
pushed off onto others can polarize it.
On one level, the problem with trying to reduce income inequality comes down to whether you still believe in the 
American Dream. If you believe that one day you will have your American Dream—a large income, large house, happy 
family, or whatever else you would like to have in life—then you do not necessarily want to prevent anyone else from 
living out their dream. You certainly would not want to run the risk that someone would want to take part of your dream 
away from you. So there is some reluctance to engage in a redistributive policy to reduce inequality.
However, when those for whom the likelihood of living the American Dream is very small are considered, there are sound 
arguments in favor of trying to create greater balance. As the text indicated, a little more income equality, gained 
through long-term programs like increased education  and job training, can increase overall economic  output. Then 
everyone is made better off. And the 1% will not seem like such a small group any more.


KEY CONCEPTS AND SUMMARY

Policies that can affect the level of economic inequality include redistribution between rich and poor, making  it  
easier  for  people  to  climb  the  ladder  of  opportunity;  and  estate  taxes,  which  are  taxes on inheritances. 
Pushing too aggressively for economic equality can run the risk of decreasing eco- nomic incentives. However, a 
moderate push for economic equality can increase economic output, both through methods like improved education and by 
building a base of political support for market forces.

SELF-CHECK QUESTIONS



1.    Here is one hypothesis: A well-funded social safety net can increase economic equality but will reduce economic 
output. Explain why this might be so, and sketch a production possibility curve that shows this tradeoff.
2.    Here is a second hypothesis: A well-funded social safety net may lead to less regulation of the market economy. 
Explain why this might be so, and sketch a production possibility curve that shows this tradeoff.
3.    Which set of policies is more likely to cause a tradeoff between economic output and equality: policies of 
redistribution or policies aimed at the ladder of opportunity? Explain how the production possibility frontier tradeoff 
between economic equality and output might look in each case.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   583




4.    Why is there reluctance on the part of some in the United States to redistribute income so that greater equality 
can be achieved?



REVIEW QUESTIONS



1.    Identify some public policies that can reduce the level of economic inequality.
2.    Describe how a push for economic equality might reduce incentives to work and produce output. Then describe how a 
push for economic inequality might not have such effects.



CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS



1.    What do you think is more important to focus on when considering inequality: income inequality or wealth 
inequality?
2.    To reduce income inequality, should the marginal tax rates on the top 1% be increased?
3.    Redistribution of income occurs through the federal income tax and government antipoverty programs. Explain 
whether or not this level of redistribution is appropriate and whether more redistribution should occur.
4.    How does a society or a country make the decision about the tradeoff between equality and economic output? Hint: 
Think about the political system.
5.    Explain what the long- and short-term consequences are of not promoting equality or working to reduce poverty.



REFERENCES

Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System.  “Research  Resources:  Survey  of  Consumer Finances.”   Last 
  modified   December   13,   2013.   http://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/scf/ scfindex.htm.

Congressional Budget Office. “The Distribution of Household Income and Federal Taxes, 2008 and 2009.” Last modified 
July 10, 2012. http://www.cbo.gov/publication/43373.

Huang, Chye-Ching, and Nathaniel Frentz. “Myths and Realities About the Estate Tax.” Center on Bud- get and Policy 
Priorities. Last modified August 29, 2013. http://www.cbpp.org/files/estatetaxmyths.pdf.

GLOSSARY

effective income tax percentage of total taxes paid divided by total income
estate tax a tax imposed on the value of an inheritance
income a flow of money received, often measured on a monthly or an annual basis
progressive tax system a tax system in which the rich pay a higher percentage of their income in taxes, rather than a 
higher absolute amount

584                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


redistribution taking income from those with higher incomes and providing income to those with lower incomes
wealtft the sum of the value of all assets, including money in bank accounts, financial investments, a pension fund, 
and the value of a home

SOLUTIONS



Answers to Self-Cfteck Questions

1.    A very strong push for economic equality might include extremely high taxes on high-wage earners to pay for 
extremely large government social payments for the poor. Such a policy could limit incentives for the high-wage 
workers, lock the poor into a poverty trap, and thus reduce output. The PPF in this case will have the standard 
appearance: it will be downward sloping.
2.    For the second hypothesis, a well-funded social safety net might make people feel that even if their company goes 
bankrupt or they need to change jobs or industries, they will have some degree of protection. As a result, people may 
be more willing to allow markets to work without interference, and not to lobby as hard for rules that would prevent 
layoffs, set price controls, or block foreign trade. In this case, safety net programs that increase equality could 
also allow the market to work more freely in a way that could  increase output. In this case, at least some portion of 
the PPF between equality and economic output would slope up.
3.    Pure redistribution is more likely to cause a sharp tradeoff between economic output and equality than policies 
aimed at the ladder of opportunity. A production possibility frontier showing a strict tradeoff between economic output 
and equality will be downward sloping. A PPF showing that it is possible to increase equality, at least to some extent, 
while either increasing output or at least not diminishing it would have a PPF that first rises, perhaps has a flat 
area, and then falls.
4.    Many view the redistribution of income to achieve greater equality as taking away from the rich to pay the poor, 
or as a “zero sum” game. By taking taxes from one group of people and redistributing them to another, the tax system is 
robbing some of the American Dream.
