


21.3  IMMIGRATION



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Analyze historical patterns of immigration

•    Explain economic effects of immigration

•    Evaluate notable proposals for immigration reform



ost Americans would be outraged if a law prevented them from moving to another city or another state. However, when the 
conversation turns to crossing national borders and are about  other  people  arriving  in  the  United  States,  laws  
preventing  such  movement  often
seem more reasonable. Some of the tensions over immigration stem from worries over how it might affect a country’s 
culture, including differences in language, and patterns of family, authority, or gen- der relationships. Economics 
does not have much to say about such cultural issues. Some of the wor- ries about immigration do, however, have to do 
with its effects on wages and income levels, and how it affects government taxes and spending. On those topics, 
economists have insights and research to offer.

HISTORICAL PATTERNS OF IMMIGRATION

Supporters and opponents of immigration look at the same data and see different patterns. Those who express concern 
about immigration levels to the United States point to graphics like Figure 1 which shows total inflows of immigrants 
decade by decade through the twentieth century. Clearly, the level of immigration has been high and rising in recent 
years, reaching and exceeding the towering levels of the early twentieth century. However, those who are less worried 
about immigration point out that the high immigration levels of the early twentieth century happened when total 
population was much lower. Since the U.S. population roughly tripled during the twentieth century, the seemingly high 
lev- els in immigration in the 1990s and 2000s look relatively smaller when they are divided by the popu- lation.

Where have the immigrants come from? Immigrants from Europe were more than 90% of the total in the first decade of the 
twentieth century, but less than 20% of the total by the end of the century. By the 2000s, about half of U.S. 
immigration came from the rest of the Americas, especially Mexico, and about a quarter came from various countries in 
Asia.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   611






















Figure 1. Immigration Since 1900. The number of immigrants in each decade declined between 1900 and the 1940s, but has 
risen sharply in recent decades. (Source: U.S. Department of Homeland Secu- rity, Yearbook of Immigration Statistics: 
2011, Table 1)
ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF IMMIGRATION

A surge of immigration can affect the economy in a number of different ways. In this section, we will consider how 
immigrants might benefit the rest of the economy, how they might affect wage levels, and how they might affect 
government spending at the federal and local level.

To understand the economic consequences of immigration, consider the following scenario. Imagine that the immigrants 
entering the United States matched the existing U.S. population in age range, education, skill levels, family size, 
occupations, and so on. How would immigration of this type affect the rest of the U.S. economy? Immigrants themselves 
would be much better off, because their stan- dard of living would be higher in the United States. Immigrants would 
contribute to both increased production and increased consumption. Given enough time for adjustment, the range of jobs 
per- formed, income earned, taxes paid, and public services needed would not be much affected by this kind of 
immigration. It would be as if the population simply increased a little.

Now, consider the reality of recent immigration to the United States. Immigrants are not identical to the rest of the 
U.S. population. About one-third of immigrants over the age of 25 lack a high school diploma. As a result, many of the 
recent immigrants end up in jobs like restaurant and hotel work, lawn care, and janitorial work. This kind of 
immigration represents a shift to the right in the supply of unskilled labor for a number of jobs, which will lead to 
lower wages for these jobs. The middle- and upper-income households that purchase the services of these unskilled 
workers will benefit from these  lower  wages.  However,  low-skilled  U.S.  workers  who  must  compete  with  
low-skilled  immi- grants for jobs will tend to suffer from immigration.

The difficult policy questions about immigration are not so much about the overall gains to the rest of the economy, 
which seem to be real but small in the context of the U.S. economy, as they are about the disruptive effects of 
immigration in specific labor markets. One disruptive effect, as just noted, is that

612                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


immigration weighted toward low-skill workers tends to reduce wages for domestic low-skill work- ers. A study by 
Micftael S. Clune found that for each 10% rise in the number of employed immigrants with no more than a high school  
diploma in the labor market, high school  students  reduced their annual number of hours worked by 3%. The effects on 
wages of low-skill workers are not large—per- haps in the range  of decline of about  1%.  These  effects  are likely 
kept low, in part,  because  of the legal floor of federal and state minimum wage laws. In addition, immigrants are 
also thought to con- tribute to increased demand for local goods and services which can stimulate the local low skilled 
labor market. It is also possible that employers, in face of abundant low-skill workers may choose production processes 
which are more labor intensive than otherwise would have been. These various factors would explain the small negative 
wage effect observed among the native low-skill workers as a result of immigration.

Another potential disruptive effect is the impact on the budgets of state and local government. Many of the costs 
imposed by immigrants are costs that arise in state-run programs, like the cost of public schooling and of welfare 
benefits. However, many of the taxes that immigrants pay are federal taxes like income taxes and Social Security taxes. 
Many immigrants do not own property (such as homes and cars), so they do not pay property taxes, which are one of the 
main sources of state and local tax revenue. Though they do pay sales taxes, which are state and local, and the 
landlords of property they rent pay property taxes. According to the nonprofit Rand Corporation, the effects of 
immigration on taxes are generally positive at the federal level, but they are negative at the state and local levels 
in places where there are many low-skilled immigrants.

Visit this website to obtain more context regarding immigration.












PROPOSALS FOR IMMIGRATION REFORM

The Congressional Jordan Commission of the 1990s proposed reducing overall levels of immigration and refocusing U.S. 
immigration policy to give priority to immigrants with a higher level of skills. In the labor market, focusing on 
high-skilled immigrants would help prevent any negative effects on the wages of low-skilled  workers. For government  
budgets,  higher-skilled  workers find jobs more quickly,  earn  higher  wages,  and  pay  more  in  taxes.  Several  
other  immigration-friendly  countries, notably Canada and Australia, have immigration systems where those with high 
levels of education or job skills have a much better chance of obtaining permission to immigrate. For the United 
States, high tech companies regularly ask for a more lenient immigration policy to admit a greater quantity of highly 
skilled workers. In addition, a current immigration issue deals with the so-called “DREAM Act” legislation not yet 
passed by Congress, which would offer a path to citizenship for illegal immi- grants brought to the United States 
before the age of 16. However, some state legislatures, such as California, have passed their own Dream Acts.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   613

If the United States decided to reduce immigration substantially, the economic losses would likely be small relative to 
the overall economy. If the United States decided to increase immigration substan- tially, the U.S. economy certainly 
is large enough to afford some additional assistance to low-wage workers or to local governments that might be 
adversely affected by immigration. Whether immigra- tion levels are increased, decreased, or left the same, the quality 
of the debate over immigration policy would be improved by an explicit recognition of who receives economic benefits 
from immigration and who bears its costs.


COLLECTIVE BARGAINING IN WISCONSIN

Should we end collective bargaining rights for government employees? In an effort to reduce the budget deficit, a con- 
tentious Wisconsin law prohibited most public employees from collectively bargaining on anything except wages. Legisla- 
tors in Wisconsin argued that public safety is so important that public safety workers should be exempted from this. 
They could not risk firefighters and police going on strike. All firms and employees know that pensions and benefits 
are expen- sive; and there was a $3.6 billion budget deficit in Wisconsin that Governor Walker and legislators wanted 
to decrease. A lingering question is: should the unions have been more willing to shoulder a greater burden of the cost 
of those benefits? That question suggests that it is the cost, not necessarily the role of the union itself, which is 
the problem. After all, unions were founded to reduce the disadvantage that single employees face when bargaining with 
employers. Because so many government employees are union members, collective bargaining is even more important for 
them.
Ultimately, the benefit of unions is in the impact they have on economic productivity and output. The more productive 
the union workers become as a result of collective bargaining, the better off the economy will be.
The long-term repercussions of the Wisconsin law have yet to be realized. As a result of this bill, wage increases 
higher than the rate of inflation for Wisconsin public sector employees must be voted upon. Imagine if you are working 
for the Wis- consin government, and are able to find a higher-paying job in the private sector. What will you do? If 
you decide to leave because your options are better elsewhere, then the government must replace you. How will the 
government find workers to replace you? For some sectors of the government, reduced numbers of workers may mean greater 
efficiency. For other sectors, though, reduced numbers of government workers may mean reduced services.


KEY CONCEPTS AND SUMMARY

The recent level of U.S. immigration is at a historically high level if measured in absolute numbers, but not if 
measured as a share of population. The overall gains to the U.S. economy from immigration are real but relatively 
small. However, immigration also causes effects like slightly lower wages for low-skill workers and budget problems for 
certain state and local governments.

SELF-CHECK QUESTIONS



If immigration is reduced, what is the impact on the wage for low-skilled labor? Explain.



REVIEW QUESTIONS



1.    Have levels of immigration to the United States been relatively high or low in recent years? Explain.
2.    How would you expect immigration by primarily low-skill workers to affect American low-skilled workers?

614                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 



3.    What factors can explain the relatively small effect of low-skilled immigration on the wages of low-skilled 
workers?



CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS



1.    If the United States allows a greater quantity of highly skilled workers, what will be the impact on the average 
wages of highly skilled employees?
2.    If all countries eliminated all barriers to immigration, would global economic growth increase? Why or why not?



REFERENCES
Clune, Michael S. “The Fiscal Impacts of Immigrants: A California Case Study.” In The Immigration Debate:  Studies  on  
the  Economic,  Demographic,  and  Fiscal  Effects  of  Immigration,  edited  by  James  P. Smith   and   Barry   
Edmonston.   Washington,   DC:   National   Academy   Press,   1998,   120–182. 
http://www.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id=5985&page=120.

Smith,  James  P.  “Immigration  Reform.”  Rand  Corporation:  Rand  Review.  http://www.rand.org/pubs/ 
periodicals/rand-review/issues/2012/fall/leadership/immigration-reform.html.

U.S. Department of Homeland Security: Office of Immigration Statistics. “2011 Yearbook of Immi- gration  Statistics.”  
September  2012.  http://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/immigra- 
tion-statistics/yearbook/2011/ois_yb_2011.pdf.

SOLUTIONS


Answers to Self-Cfteck Questions
If a large share of immigrants have relatively low skills, then reducing the number of immigrants would shift the 
supply curve of low-skill labor back to the left, which would tend to raise the equilibrium wage for low-skill labor.



CHAPTER 22. INFORMATION, RISK, AND INSURANCE
