


25.2  SMITH,  MARX,  KEYNES,  CHARTALISM  AND  MODERN MONEY  THEORY



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Explain and compare the two views of money’s origin and its value





The answers to the questions of value raised in the previous section can be found by examining the following two 
quotes, from arguably the two most significant characters in the history of political economy.  The first comes from 
Adam Smith’s The Wealth of Nations:

A prince, who should enact a certain proportion of his taxes be paid in a paper money of a certain kind, might thereby 
give a certain value to this paper money.[1]

The second quote, similar in theme, comes from Karl Marx’s Capital Vol. I, and reads:

The only part of the so-called national wealth that actually enters into the collective possessions of modern peoples 
is–their national debt. Hence as a necessary consequence, the modern doc- trine that a nation becomes the richer the 
more deeply it is in debt.  Public credit becomes the credo of capital.  And with the rise of national debt-making, 
want of faith in the national debt takes the place of the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, which may not be 
forgiven.[2]

From these two quotes, the primary difference between the Metallists and Chartalists approaches to understanding money 
is revealed.  Money is not a commodity.  Money is, in the words of the legal scholar Friedrich Knapp, a creature of the 
state.

What may seem to be a subtle difference is in reality substantial.  The reorientation of money as a state phenomenon, 
rather than a market solution to the double coincidence of wants requires a completely different framework for 
analyzing the economy.  The economy can no longer be modeled as a barter system.  Real analysis fails to capture the 
complexity of money, and thus even the existence of general equilibrium itself is called into question. Returning to 
Schumpeter, if the modus operandi of money is not simply a facilitator role, then we must conduct monetary analysis.  
Simply put, this requires the abandonment “of the idea that all essential features of economic life can be represented 
by a barter- economy model” (Schumpeter 1954).

We can begin to appreciate the difference between the analysis of a barter system and a money econ-

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   707
omy by applying Marx’s notation and modeling of the circuit of money capital.This notation is sim- ple and 
straightforward (see also Chapter Y: “The Megacorp”).






where the first stage M – C is termed purchase and is followed by the production process P culminat- ing with C’ – M’ 
sale.  This analysis of the economy is a monetary analysis.  Returning to the barter notation, from above, the 
transaction would look like this.





Note, there is no C’ in this exchange.  This is because the value is generated, not by production or labor, but through 
the act of exchange.  Remember, in the barter economy of the neoclassical school, trade does not occur unless both 
parties benefit.  Value is created through the exchange process and relative prices become the measure of those values 
(this is also described in Chapter 3 On Values). Where in Marx’s model, value is created through the production process 
and comes from labor.

As you can see, the interpretation of how the economy operates is very different. The predictions of outcomes from 
market activity are also at odds. In the real analysis of neoclassical economics, mar- kets trend towards equilibrium.  
Real analysis predicts a stable solution where quantity demanded is equal to the quantity supplied. However, if the 
economy is investigated from the monetary analysis perspective, simple solutions do not immediately present themselves, 
as conflict, business cycles, and crisis are all consistently observed in capitalist economies and central topics of 
analysis in Marx’s the- oretical framework.

This is one reason why John Maynard Keynes considered his approach to understanding the economy as The  General  Theory 
 of  Employment,  Interest,  and  Money.  Similar to Marx, although Keynes denies any Marxian influence, Keynes moves 
his analysis of the economy beyond the barter system and real analysis and attempts to understand the dynamics of a 
monetary production economy.  For Keynes, in a monetary production economy, there is no reason to assume the economy 
will trend towards full employment equilibrium in the labor market.  In fact, given the special properties of money, 
the econ- omy is more than capable of coming to rest, for long periods of time, at a level of output far below what is 
necessary to achieve full employment.

Keynes argues that money has two special properties that differentiate it from all other commodities in the economy.  
The first is that money has a near zero elasticity of production.  This means that, while it might be reasonable to 
argue that a problem in our local economy is that there is a shortage of money, we cannot go into the business of 
selling money.  So unlike wheat, milk, cars, tables, or any other good or service, as entrepreneurs, we cannot address 
the unmet demand for money by produc- ing it ourselves.  The second of these properties is a near zero elasticity of 
substitution.  This prop- erty relates to the use of money as a means of payment.  The state and most private vendors 
will only accept dollars (in the United States) as means of payment to satisfy debt obligations.  Wow, that is a 
mouthful, but it simply means that there are very few substitutes for money as a method of payment.

708                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


The IRS will not take your laptop as a payment for your taxes.  The gas company is not interested in your tee shirts to 
satisfy your bill, they will only accept one thing: cash.  As the Wu-Tang Clan so suc- cinctly puts it, C.R.E.A.M. cash 
rules everything around me…. dollar dollar bill y’all.

Figure 1.  $1 Federal Reserve Note





















Image    from    the    Federal    Reserve    Bank    of    Philadelphia, 
https://www.philadelphiafed.org/education/teachers/publica- tions/symbols-on-american-money

These two special characteristics of money influence a monetary production economy, by incorporat- ing two missing 
pieces from the real analysis approach of neoclassical economics, uncertainty and the state. Hence, it is a more 
“general theory.”  Let’s discuss the state first and then provide a brief discus- sion of uncertainty. Why can’t we 
produce dollars?  Well this is against the law.  By law, the Treasury Department is the only producer of new U.S. 
dollars. We will elaborate on this in detail in the next section. Second, why won’t the state take my laptop?  For this 
let’s take a moment to look at the dol- lar (Figure 1 above).  Up in the upper left corner it says “THIS NOTE IS LEGAL 
TENDER FOR ALL DEBTS, PUBLIC AND PRIVATE”.  This means that there is no reason for the state to accept anything else in 
payment.  If you believe that your laptop is of sufficient value to cover your tax obligation, then you must first 
convert it into cash to pay your tax bill, and this introduces an important concept in Keynes’s monetary framework, 
liquidity.

Liquidity is a measure of the costs associated with converting an asset into cash.  For example, your savings account 
is an asset.  It is very liquid, but to convert it into cash you need to go to the bank and withdraw the funds.  This 
time and effort is a cost, but these costs are relatively low.   An example of an asset that is not generally described 
as being liquid is a home.  The sale and conversion of a home into cash is a time consuming and often-expensive 
process.  An asset’s liquidity is of great importance for understanding economic volatility and how risk and 
uncertainty differ.

To describe the value of assets in a monetary production economy, Keynes uses what he describes as the own rate.  The 
own rate is a measure of an asset’s economic value and is composed of three parts,

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   709

the expected return on the asset (q), its carrying costs (c), and the liquidity premium (l).  This is dis- played 
mathematically as,

own rate = q – c + l.

Returning to the example of a home, the expected return, pre-housing crisis, was strong, based on historical data.  A 
home’s carrying costs are not cheap.  Maintenance, mortgage payments, property taxes, etc. all push up the carrying 
costs, but you get to live there and conventional wisdom said that a homes value always increases.   The final 
component is its liquidity premium, which is also related to the expected return.  A house in a sellers’ market in a 
good neighborhood might sell quickly, whereas a home next to a newly constructed slaughterhouse might not be so easy to 
unload.

Thus, people’s view towards the future plays a critical role in determining the own rate.  If the housing market is 
strong, then it is easy to sell because the expected return is positive and the future seller does not think selling in 
the future has much risk either.  On the other hand, if the market is doing poorly, then expected return is going down, 
carrying costs might be increasing, as pickier buyers are demanding more and more repairs, and the liquidity premium is 
disappearing, as a buyer cannot be found.

This equation can be applied to all sorts of commodities.  Give it a try in the exercise section below. Think about a 
car, stocks and bonds, or a record collection.  These assets all change in own rate based on expectations of the future 
and how quickly they can be converted into cash.  Because it is more dif- ficult to convert assets into cash when 
markets are unstable and uncertain, people tend to hold onto the one asset that is not negatively impacted.  You 
guessed it: money.

The  saving  money  by  individual  in  times  of  uncertainty  is  problematic  for  the  economy.  Keynes argues that 
this virtuous behavior, from the classical economic perspective, aggregates to difficulties for the macro economy as a 
whole. If you are saving, then, yes, this practice can be beneficial for you, but if we are all saving, then we are not 
spending and this sends negative signals to investors and busi- ness owners.  So while individual savings is good, the 
aggregation of this positive behavior generates adverse economic conditions as a whole.  This problem is known as the 
Paradox of Thrift.  This para- dox creates difficulties for the neoclassical argument that the aggregation of optimal 
decisions aggre- gates to a stable and harmonious society or equilibrium conditions.

If we return to Adam Smith’s comments above, we can add the contributions by Marx and Keynes to complete the basic 
framework for understanding money, not as a commodity in a barter system, but as a social relation in a modern 
capitalist economy.  Remember, the value of money in the Met- allist’s story is derived intrinsically by a precious 
metal, but Adam Smith seems to be suggesting that value can be generated by the actions of the Prince.  This is a 
prescient observation by Smith, as mod- ern fiat currencies maintain the value by generating demand through the 
implementation of a tax or other obligation to the money issuing authority.  Therefore, an historical and institutional 
approach to investigating money reveals fundamentally different dynamics and explanations of the operations of the 
modern economy.  From this interdisciplinary perspective: all economic activity is observed to begin and end with 
money, money plays this central role because it has special properties, and an authority, such as the state, is 
responsible for maintaining their currency’s value.

By breaking free from the methodological constraints of real analysis, Modern Money Theory (MMT) is able to provide 
insights into economic activity where money serves as more than a contributor to the modus operandi in support of 
barter.  In the next section, money is investigated as a social relation.

710                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


This social relation can be described as a two-sided balance sheet operation.  These relations of credits and debits 
are ordered in the modern economy by a hierarchical structure.  As this institutional struc- ture is outlined below, 
the coordinating function of money and its role in determining value becomes clear.

[1] For those looking for an accessible way to introduce themselves to Adam Smith’s vast opus, Robert Heilbroner’s The 
Essential Adam Smith is an excellent resource.  Some may be already familiar with his text The Worldly Philosophers.

[2] This insight is drawn from Capital Vol. I.



25.3  THE  MONEY  HIERARCHY  AND  THE  FALSE  DUALITY  OF  THE STATE  AND  MARKET



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Apply the vocabulary and conceptions framework developed in the previous section to the Hierarchy of Money
•    Explain where money comes from in a monetary production economy





Hyman Minsky once argued that anyone can make money; the real trick is getting people to accept it.[1]  For the 
Metallists, gold or a precious metal’s intrinsic value insured money’s acceptance as a facilitator of exchange.  While 
simplicity is often a strong characteristic, when it comes to money, a more thorough understanding of money’s source of 
value transforms the relationship between the market and the state.   We often think of these two concepts as opposing 
forces struggling to direct economic activity.  From this perspective, one might imagine the market as the strong lead 
character in pursuit of efficient solutions, and the state as a pesky nemesis taking resources from the market to 
achieve its own objectives.  This plot, however, takes an unexpected twist in Modern Money Theory, as these two 
characters are revealed to be the same person.  The real analysis claims of duality between the state and the market 
are the product of methodology.  The “trick” is not that we accept dollars, but that the true source of their value 
continues to be largely ignored by economists, policy makers, and the general public.

In 2011, renowned London School of Economics anthropologist David Graeber published a compre- hensive examination of 
the historical origins and development of money, titled Debt:The First 5000 Years.  While  all  5000  years  are 
interesting,  and  students  are encouraged  to explore this exemplary work of scholarship, our focus is limited to the 
current economic system. This narrow focus will allow us to build upon the above ideas of Marx and Keynes and to 
develop an understanding of key concepts from MMT.  The first of these concepts is the hierarchy of money.  From this 
conceptual framework, we will explore the tecftnostructure  of money (see Chapter 16 The Megacorp).  The collection of 
institutions that regulate money’s issuance or production, are similar to the market governance (see Chapter 16 The 
Megacorp) of business enterprises in that stability is a primary objective. Given the central role of money in economic 
activity and its origins with the state, the clear delineation between where the market begins and state ends is all 
but erased.

712                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


We begin our analysis with MMT’s hierarchy of money.  As a social relation, not all money is created equal.  For 
example, by definition as a social relation, you borrowing a shirt from your roommate is a money transaction, as long 
as you promise to give it back.  We call this an IOU.  I had a friend in high school that literally carried around a 
notebook listing all of the people that owed him money (he now works in finance).  These records represented promises 
to pay. For some of those entries repayment was completed and their name removed, for others, I’m sure they are still 
in that notebook somewhere in Ol’ Johnny Cocktail’s archives.

These  promises  to  pay  were  money  transactions.   They  are  two-sided  balance  sheet  operations. Johnny extends 
credit to his friend; the friend takes on a debt to Johnny.  When repayment occurs Johnny’s asset and his friend’s 
liability are terminated.  Going back to Hyman Minsky’s comment, if one regularly borrows and repays Johnny rapidly, 
then both parties are willing to accept the terms of the social relation.  However, if one does not repay, then future 
credit extension will not occur. Thus, it takes two to tango.  This type of transaction between friends and family are 
so common, we would not generally describe them as money, because that seems odd.  Similarly, borrowing a cup of sugar 
from your neighbor to make cookies and promising to give some of the cookies in exchange is an informal arrangement, 
but is still one of credit and debt and thus money.  The informality of these transactions makes them difficult to 
enforce, hence they represent the money social relations at the base of our money hierarchy (Figure 2).


Figure 2. The Money Hierarchy


























What  differentiates  the  common  and  largely  unregulated  IOU  transactions  from  those  that  are described as we 
move up the hierarchy is the institutional formality and enforceability of those social

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   713

relations.  So the second level, contracts, might be promises to pay businesses, such as your network services  
provider.   They  promise  to  provide  a  service  for  a  year,  and  you  promise  to  pay  a  dollar amount for 
that service.  They credit you with service and you pay back your debt.  This contract, unlike Johnny’s notebook, is 
legally enforceable in dollars.  If you or the network provider breaks your promise legal recourse is available.

Moving on up the hierarchy we have the financial sector and then the U.S. Treasury at the very top. The formality and 
institutional structure of the social relations generated by these organizations are what place them at higher levels 
of this hierarchy.  The financial sector is similar to the contracts cre- ated below it on the hierarchy, so we will 
focus our attention on the U.S. Treasury.  The U.S. Treasury is unique, because by Constitutional Law it is the sole 
source of new U.S. dollar issue. This institu- tional reality is one of the most significant aspects of MMT, because in 
stark contrast to the Metallist’s story money comes from the state not the market.


Figure 3.































Figure (3) vividly displays the hierarchy in action. As you can see, as the red line goes into the negative (government 
deficit), the green line increases (private sector wealth), at a nearly 1:1 ratio. This rela- tionship between public 
and private spending is described by the accounting identity equation know as sectoral balances.

714                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


0 = (I – S) + (G – T) + (net exports)

This equation states that the balance sheets of the private, public and international current accounts sectors of the 
economy sum to zero.  If we were to close the economy and only have the public and private sector, then when the 
private sector spends more than it takes in (deficit spends), the public sector, by accounting identity runs a surplus. 
 This situation rarely occurs.  If we examine Figure 3, we see that in the early 2000’s a very brief period of 
government budget surplus took place, only to be followed by recession and a movement back to state deficits and 
private surpluses.

Before pressing forward, let’s take a moment to summarize the hierarchy of money. Money is a social relation.  It is a 
two-sided balance sheet operation or an IOU.  It consists of at least two parties whom agree to a credit debit 
relationship.  The hierarchy of money is characterized by the institutional con- straints and enforcement of these 
social relations. At the top of the hierarchy is the issuer of the cur- rency.  The currency issued in the United 
States is the dollar.  Rather than the dollar emerging in the market to solve the double coincidence of wants, the 
dollar comes from the state.  This leaves us with the question of value.  If there is not a precious metal or intrinsic 
value to the dollar, then where does its value come from?

Value comes from a promise from the state to accept U.S. dollars as payment for taxes.  This promise creates demand for 
dollars in the United States.  The demand for dollars is what maintains the dollar’s value. Thus, MMT argues that taxes 
drive money.  An important question that this raises is how does this impact the value of goods and services produced?  
Remember in the orthodox approach the prices of goods and services are measures of their relative values as they are 
traded in a barter system, but if we have a monetary production economy, then how are these activity’s values 
determined? Much of this was clearly outlined at the enterprise level in the Costs and Prices chapter and further ana- 
lyzed in the Megacorp.  Here we ask the question, how does our perspective on value change when we approach money as an 
industry with the United States as the monopoly producer?

As the monopoly producer of the dollar, the Unites States government is not the pesky nemesis taking money from the 
market to fund its spending.  Instead private markets and the financial industry are provided  with  the  legal  
authority  to  create  dollar  denominated  assets.   This  process  greatly  limits what is viewed to have value to 
activities that generate profits.  This mode of utilizing money-issuing authority makes it very difficult for many in 
the economic system to participate in the dollar econ- omy.  Orthodox economics and the Metallist story argues that 
value creation is best handled by mar- kets, rather than direct state spending.  As the monopoly producer of the 
currency, it is a political decision about how money enters the system and assigns value. Many MMT theorists argue that 
the values of the community would be better met through a universal program for full employment.  This would mean the 
monopoly producer would take more control over value creation to meet the needs of the public, than it currently does.

The sectoral balances relationship between the public and private sector, suggests that there is an inti- mate 
relationship between state and market activities.  The approach taken by neoclassical economics suggests an 
antagonistic relationship based on real analysis.  The foundation for this position is that the state must take money 
from the private sector to spend.  The history and an institutional analysis of where money comes from debunk this 
foundation.  If, as Keynes suggests, we live in a monetary production economy and all new issue comes from the state, 
then continuing to approach the market and state as hard duals is likely to continue to leave many outside of the 
dollar economy in states of unemployment and poverty.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   715
To further examine money’s ability to activate value, we will now turn to an examination  of local currency  systems.   
Local  currency  systems  are  experiments.   These  experiments  are  attempting  to build understanding about the 
power of our most important social technology.  Remember, we have defined technology as the application of scientific 
or organized knowledge of practical tasks.  What could be more practical a task than to understand money?
[1] Stephanie [Bell] Kelton’s 2001 Cambridge Journal of Economics article “The Role of the State and the Hierarchy of 
Money” is widely considered to be a seminal piece in the development of Modern Money Theory.
