


25.4  LOCAL  CURRENCY  SYSTEMS:  SOCIAL  MONEY  AND COMMUNITY  CURRENCIES



LEARNING OBJECTIVES


By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Compare to different monetary systems
•    Critique money issue and the how money can be utilized for value creation



s an alternative to centralized money issue, communities are exploring their own money issu- ing strategies.  There are 
several types of local currency systems, and we will describe a couple of  the  most  common  ones’  general  
characteristics  and  institutional  structures  below.  One
source  that  outlines  the  extent  to  which  currency  experimentation  has  grown  during  the  era  of 
neoliberalism is described by the 2012 International Journal of Community  Currency Research Special Issue titled 
“Thirty Years of Community Currencies: A Review of Impacts, Potential and Challenges.” This edition contains papers 
from a two-day academic conference that included scholars from several academic disciplines.  Scholars in economics, 
history, geography, law, sociology, anthropology, and political science, etc. presented research from those disciplines 
individually and through interdiscipli- nary methodologies as well. In addition to the diversity of academic 
perspectives community curren- cies are attracting, they are also covering diverse political and geographic terrains 
across the planet. More than 20 different countries were represented at this conference.

One reason that such a diverse set of tools is necessary for studying community currencies is that if the Metallist’s 
story of money is false, then the price mechanism or the invisible hand is not an ade- quate means of determining 
value.  In The Picture of Dorian Gray, Oscar Wilde tells us that; “Nowadays people know the price of everything and the 
value of nothing.”  Community currencies are projects that work to allow communities to assign values to activities and 
goods that central currency schemes are not pricing properly.  As such, these activities are experiments.  These 
experiments are guided by general philosophies, such as solidarity and reciprocity. Their philosophies influence goals 
and the purpose of currency creation, examples include: community stability, intergenerational relationship building, 
and strengthening of territory or stimulating economic activity.  From these general goals, communities create real 
jobs: to promote sustainable production, support the elderly, women’s pro- grams, and other civically oriented tasks 
not being met by the market of fiscal sectors of the econ- omy.[1]  Thus, when value is reintroduced into a discussion 
about the economy, the limited toolset available under real analysis is replaced by a diversity of methodologies from 
several academic disci- plines.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   717

In an effort to organize the analysis of this diverse and growing collection of money systems, three categories of 
local currency systems has been suggested.[2]  The first of these are local currencies are territorial projects.  These 
projects are typically defined by geographic boundaries and are designed to strengthen the areas resilience or 
development.  Second, community currencies are projects devel- oped to address a specific community need.  Such needs 
are usually determined by a group of local actors attempting to emphasize increased wellbeing, empowerment of a 
repressed group, or support environmental  health.  The  third  type  is  a  complementary  currency.   Complementary  
currencies  are designed to support an economic objective. These systems are generally designed with regard to mar- ket 
principles and work to support activities between production and exchange of goods and services. These types of 
currency systems are not mutually exclusive in their characteristics.  In fact many take on objectives and 
characteristics that draw from multiple currency types.  One such currency system is the Red del Traque (RT) of 
Argentina.

Ecologists developed the RT currency system.  In this ecological model, the wellbeing of women and families  were  a  
primary  objective.   To  accomplish  their  objective,  markets  or  ‘nodos’  were  set  up in economically depressed 
neighborhoods. These markets used the RT currency system to organize labor efforts and create household stability by 
encouraging self-production, reducing waste, promot- ing resale of household items, providing social welfare labor, and 
helping to distribute unsold sur- pluses in local businesses through new trade outlets.[3] Thus, from this description 
we could classify the RT in all three of the suggested category types. It is a community currency based on its primary 
objective.  It can also be described as a complementary currency as it facilitated market exchanges, and it targeted 
particular territories based on economic need, territorial.

By creating a local currency system, many Argentinians who had been abandoned by the peso econ- omy, where provided an 
opportunity to contribute to social activity and find some economic stabil- ity.  In a sense, Argentinians were able to 
solve Keynes’s elasticity problem.  There was a shortage of money in their communities, so they found a creative, 
socially driven solution to solve the shortage. This local currency system effectively organized available resources 
and produced outputs that were deemed valuable to the community.

To conclude, money takes on very different roles in our economic system based on the methodology applied to study 
economic activity.  If it is simply the medium of exchange, then the coordination of inputs to produce outputs is the 
role of individual firms.  However, when money is observed in its his- torical and institutional setting, business 
enterprises need money to initiate those coordinating func- tions, as we see in Marx’s circuit of money capital. Given 
this central role in all economic activity, the task of economists and other scholars is to help society create laws 
and institutions such that money is available to initiate productive value generating activities, because merely 
assessing value through profits appears to be a woefully inadequate approach.

[1] This information can be found in “Community currency research: An analysis of the literature” in Vol. 15 in the 
2011 International Journal of Community Currency.

[2] The French economists Jerome Blanc has published widely in the area of community and comple- mentary currencies.

[3] Georgina Gomez and Bert Helmsing from the Hague in the Netherlands published a very inter- esting article about the 
spatial distribution of the RT in Argentina in the 2008 Vol. 36(11) of World Development titled “Selective Spatial 
Closure and Local Economic Development.”

718                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 




CHAPTER 26. INTERNATIONAL TRADE




INTRODUCTION  TO  INTERNATIONAL  TRADE































Figure 1. Apple or Samsung iPhone? While the iPhone is readily recognized as an Apple product, 26% of the com- ponent 
costs in it come from components made by rival phone-maker, Samsung. In international trade, there are often 
“conflicts” like this as each country or company focuses on what it does best. (Credit: modification of work by Yutaka 
Tsutano Creative Commons)


JUST WHOSE IPHONE IS IT?

The  iPhone  is  a  global  product.  Apple  does  not  manufacture  the  iPhone  components,  nor  does  it  assemble  
them.  The assembly is done by Foxconn Corporation, a Taiwanese company, at its factory in Sengzhen, China. But, 
Samsung, the elec- tronics firm and competitor to Apple, actually supplies many of the parts that make up an 
iPhone—about 26%. That means, that Samsung is both the biggest supplier and biggest competitor for Apple. Why do these 
two firms work together to pro- duce the iPhone? To understand the economic logic behind international trade, you have 
to accept, as these firms do, that trade is about mutually beneficial exchange. Samsung is one of the world’s largest 
electronics parts suppliers. Apple lets Samsung focus on making the best parts, which allows Apple to concentrate on 
its strength—designing elegant products

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   721


that are easy to use. If each company (and by extension each country) focuses on what it does best, there will be gains 
for all through trade.


CHAPTER OBJECTIVES


Introduction to International Trade
In this chapter, you will learn about:

•    Absolute and Comparative Advantage
•    What Happens When a Country Has an Absolute Advantage in All Goods
•    Intra-industry Trade between Similar Economies
•    The Benefits of Reducing Barriers to International Trade



We live in a global marketplace. The food on your table might include fresh fruit from Chile, cheese from France, and 
bottled water from Scotland. Your wireless phone might have been made in Taiwan or Korea. The clothes you wear might be 
designed in Italy and manufactured in China. The toys you give to a child might have come from India. The car you drive 
might come from Japan, Germany, or Korea. The gasoline in the tank might be refined from crude oil from Saudi Arabia, 
Mexico, or Nigeria. As a worker, if your job is involved with farming, machinery, airplanes, cars, scientific instru- 
ments, or many other technology-related industries, the odds are good that a hearty proportion of the sales of your 
employer—and hence the money that pays your salary—comes from export sales. We are all linked by international trade, 
and the volume of that trade has grown dramatically in the last few decades.

The first wave of globalization started in the nineteenth century and lasted up to the beginning of World War I. Over 
that time, global exports as a share of global GDP rose from less than 1% of GDP in 1820 to 9% of GDP in 1913. As the 
Nobel Prize-winning economist Paul Krugman of Princeton University wrote in 1995:

It is a late-twentieth-century conceit that we invented the global economy just yesterday. In fact, world markets 
achieved an impressive degree of integration during the second half of the nineteenth century. Indeed, if one wants a 
specific date for the beginning of a truly global economy, one might well choose 1869, the year in which both the Suez 
Canal and the Union Pacific railroad were completed. By the eve of the First World War steamships and railroads had 
created markets for standardized commodities, like wheat and wool, that were fully global in their reach. Even the 
global flow of information was better than modern observers, focused on electronic technology, tend to realize: the 
first submarine telegraph cable  was laid under the Atlantic in 1858, and by 1900 all of the world’s major economic 
regions could effectively communicate instantaneously.

This first wave of globalization crashed to a halt in the beginning of the twentieth century. World War I severed many 
economic connections. During the Great Depression of the 1930s, many nations mis- guidedly tried to fix their own 
economies by reducing foreign trade with others. World War II fur- ther hindered international trade. Global flows of 
goods and financial capital rebuilt themselves only slowly after World War II. It was not until the early 1980s that 
global economic forces again became as important, relative to the size of the world economy, as they were before World 
War I.
