


26.1  ABSOLUTE  AND  COMPARATIVE  ADVANTAGE



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Define absolute advantage, comparative advantage, and opportunity costs

•    Explain the gains of trade created when a country specializes



he  American  statesman  Benjamin  Franklin  (1706–1790)  once  wrote:  “No  nation  was  ever ruined by trade.” Many 
economists would express their attitudes toward international trade in an even more positive manner. The evidence that 
international trade confers overall benefits on
economies is pretty strong. Trade has accompanied economic growth in the United States and around the world. Many of 
the national economies that have shown the most rapid growth in the last few decades—for example, Japan, South Korea, 
China, and India—have done so by dramatically orienting their economies toward international trade. There is no modern 
example of a country that has shut itself off from world trade and yet prospered. To understand the benefits of trade, 
or why we trade in the first place, we need to understand the concepts of comparative and absolute advantage.
In 1817, David Ricardo, a businessman, economist, and member of the British Parliament, wrote a treatise called On the 
Principles of Political Economy and Taxation. In this treatise, Ricardo argued that specialization and free trade 
benefit all trading partners, even those that may be relatively inefficient. To see what he meant, we must be able to 
distinguish between absolute and comparative advantage.

A  country  has  an  absolute  advantage  in  producing  a  good  over  another  country  if  it  uses  fewer resources 
to produce that good. Absolute advantage can be the result of a country’s natural endow- ment. For example, extracting 
oil in Saudi Arabia is pretty much just a matter of “drilling a hole.” Pro- ducing oil in other countries can require 
considerable exploration and costly technologies for drilling and extraction—if indeed they have any oil at all. The 
United States has some of the richest farm- land in the world, making it easier to grow corn and wheat than in many 
other countries. Guatemala and Colombia have climates especially suited for growing coffee. Chile and Zambia have some 
of the world’s richest copper mines. As some have argued, “geography is destiny.” Chile will provide copper and 
Guatemala will produce coffee, and they will trade. When each country has a product others need and it can be produced 
with fewer resources in one country over another, then it is easy to imagine all parties benefitting from trade. 
However, thinking about trade just in terms of geography and absolute advantage is incomplete. Trade really occurs 
because of comparative advantage.

Recall from the chapter Choice in a World of Scarcity that a country has a comparative advantage
when a good can be produced at a lower cost in terms of other goods. The question each country or

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   723
company should be asking when it trades is this: “What do we give up to produce this good?” It should be no surprise 
that the concept of comparative advantage is based on this idea of opportunity cost from Choice in a World of Scarcity. 
For example, if Zambia focuses its resources on producing cop- per, its labor, land and financial resources cannot be 
used to produce other goods such as corn. As a result, Zambia gives up the opportunity to produce corn. How do we 
quantify the cost in terms of other goods? Simplify the problem and assume that Zambia just needs labor to produce 
copper and corn. The companies that produce either copper or corn tell you that it takes 10 hours to mine a ton of 
copper and 20 hours to harvest a bushel of corn. This means the opportunity cost of producing a ton of copper is 2 
bushels of corn. The next section develops absolute and comparative advantage in greater detail and relates them to 
trade.
Visit this website for a list of articles and podcasts pertaining to international trade topics.












A NUMERICAL EXAMPLE OF ABSOLUTE AND COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE

Consider a hypothetical world with two countries, Saudi Arabia and the United States, and two prod- ucts, oil and corn. 
Further assume that consumers in both countries desire both these goods. These goods are homogeneous, meaning that 
consumers/producers cannot differentiate between corn or oil from either country. There is only one resource available 
in both countries, labor hours. Saudi Arabia can produce oil with fewer resources, while the United States can produce 
corn with fewer resources. Table 1 illustrates the advantages of the two countries, expressed in terms of how many 
hours it takes to produce one unit of each good.

Country            Oil (ftours per barrel)    Corn (ftours per busftel)
Saudi Arabia     1                                           4
United States    2                                           1
Table 1. How Many Hours It Takes to Produce Oil and Corn

In Table 1, Saudi Arabia has an absolute advantage in the production of oil because it only takes an hour to produce a 
barrel of oil compared to two hours in the United States. The United States has an absolute advantage in the production 
of corn.

To simplify, let’s say that Saudi Arabia and the United States each have 100 worker hours (see Table 2). We illustrate 
what each country is capable of producing on its own using a production possibility frontier (PPF) graph, shown in 
Figure 1. Recall from Choice in a World of Scarcity that the produc- tion possibilities frontier shows the maximum 
amount that each country can produce given its lim- ited resources, in this case workers, and its level of technology.

724                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 



Country            Oil Production using 100 worker ftours (barrels)
Corn Production using 100 worker ftours (busftels)
Saudi Arabia    100                                                                                          or    25

United States

50                                                                                            or    100
Table 2. Production Possibilities before Trade


















Figure 1. Production Possibilities Frontiers. (a) Saudi Arabia can produce 100 barrels of oil at maximum and zero corn 
(point A), or 25 bushels of corn and zero oil (point B). It can also produce other combinations of oil and corn if it 
wants to consume both goods, such as at point C. Here it chooses to produce/consume 60 barrels of oil, leaving 40 work 
hours that can be allocated to producing 10 bushels of corn, using the data in Table 1. (b) If the United States 
produces only oil, it can produce, at maximum, 50 barrels and zero corn (point A’), or at the other extreme, it can 
produce a maximum of 100 bushels of corn and no oil (point B’). Other combinations of both oil and corn are possible, 
such as point C’. All points above the frontiers are impossible to produce given the current level of resources and 
technology.

Arguably Saudi and U.S. consumers desire both oil and corn to live. Let’s say that before trade occurs, both countries 
produce and consume at point C or C’. Thus, before trade, the Saudi Arabian economy will devote 60 worker hours to 
produce oil, as shown in Table 3. Given the information in Table 1, this choice implies that it produces/consumes 60 
barrels of oil. With the remaining 40 worker hours, since it needs four hours to produce a bushel of corn, it can 
produce only 10 bushels. To be at point C’, the U.S. economy devotes 40 worker hours to produce 20 barrels of oil and 
the remaining worker hours can be allocated to produce 60 bushels of corn.

Country                                 Oil Production (barrels)    Corn Production (busftels)
Saudi Arabia (C)                    60                                              10
United States (C’)                  20                                              60
Total World Production    80                                              70
Table 3. Production before Trade
The slope of the production possibility frontier illustrates the opportunity cost of producing oil in terms of corn. 
Using all its resources, the United States can produce 50 barrels of oil or 100 bushels of

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   725
corn. So the opportunity cost of one barrel of oil is two bushels of corn—or the slope is 1/2. Thus, in the U.S. 
production possibility frontier graph, every increase in oil production of one barrel implies a decrease of two bushels 
of corn. Saudi Arabia can produce 100 barrels of oil or 25 bushels of corn. The opportunity cost of producing one 
barrel of oil is the loss of 1/4 of a bushel of corn that Saudi workers could otherwise have produced. In terms of 
corn, notice that Saudi Arabia gives up the least to produce a barrel of oil. These calculations are summarized in 
Table 4.

Country           Opportunity cost of one unit — Oil (in terms of corn)
Opportunity cost of one unit — Corn (in terms of oil)
Saudi Arabia    ¼                                                                                                    4
United
States                2                                                                                                 
    ½
Table 4. Opportunity Cost and Comparative Advantage

Again  recall  that  comparative  advantage  was  defined  as  the  opportunity  cost  of  producing  goods. Since 
Saudi Arabia gives up the least to produce a barrel of oil, (1414 < 22 in Table 4) it has a compar- ative advantage in 
oil production. The United States gives up the least to produce a bushel of corn, so it has a comparative advantage in 
corn production.

In this example, there is symmetry between absolute and comparative advantage. Saudi Arabia needs fewer worker hours to 
produce oil (absolute advantage, see Table 1), and also gives up the least in terms of other goods to produce oil 
(comparative advantage, see Table 4). Such symmetry is not always the case, as we will show after we have discussed 
gains from trade fully. But first, read the following Clear It Up feature to make sure you understand why the PPF line 
in the graphs is straight.


CAN A PRODUCTION POSSIBILITY FRONTIER BE STRAIGHT?

When  you  first  met  the  production  possibility  frontier  (PPF)  in  the  chapter  on  Choice  in  a  World  of  
Scarcity  it  was drawn with an outward-bending shape. This shape illustrated that as inputs were transferred from 
producing one good to another—like from education to health services—there were increasing opportunity costs. In the 
examples in this chap- ter, the PPFs are drawn as straight lines, which means that opportunity costs are constant. When 
a marginal unit of labor is transferred away from growing corn and toward producing oil, the decline in the quantity of 
corn and the increase in the quantity of oil is always the same. In reality this is possible only if the contribution 
of additional workers to output did not change as the scale of production changed. The linear production possibilities 
frontier is a less realistic model, but a straight line simplifies calculations. It also illustrates economic themes 
like absolute and comparative advantage just as clearly.


GAINS FROM TRADE

Consider the trading positions of the United States and Saudi Arabia after they have specialized and traded. Before 
trade, Saudi Arabia produces/consumes 60 barrels of oil and 10 bushels of corn. The United States produces/consumes 20 
barrels of oil and 60 bushels of corn. Given their current pro- duction levels, if the United States can trade an 
amount of corn fewer than 60 bushels and receives in exchange an amount of oil greater than 20 barrels, it will gain 
from trade. With trade, the United States can consume more of both goods than it did without specialization and trade. 
(Recall that the chapter Welcome to Economics! defined specialization as it applies to workers and firms. Specializa- 
tion is also used to describe the occurrence when a country shifts resources to focus on producing

726                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


a good that offers comparative advantage.) Similarly, if Saudi Arabia can trade an amount of oil less than 60 barrels 
and receive in exchange an amount of corn greater than 10 bushels, it will have more of both goods than it did before 
specialization and trade. Table 5 illustrates the range of trades that would benefit both sides.


Tfte U.S. Economy, after Specialization, Will Benefit If It:
Tfte Saudi Arabian Economy, after Specialization, Will Benefit If It:
Exports no more than 60 bushels of corn                                Imports at least 10 bushels of corn Imports at 
least 20 barrels of oil                                                 Exports less than 60 barrels of oil Table 5. 
The Range of Trades That Benefit Both the United States and Saudi Arabia

The underlying reason why trade benefits both sides is rooted in the concept of opportunity cost, as the following 
Clear It Up feature explains. If Saudi Arabia wishes to expand domestic production of corn in a world without 
international trade, then based on its opportunity costs it must give up four barrels of oil for every one additional 
bushel of corn. If Saudi Arabia could find a way to give up less than four barrels of oil for an additional bushel of 
corn (or equivalently, to receive more than one bushel of corn for four barrels of oil), it would be better off.


WHAT ARE THE OPPORTUNITY COSTS AND GAINS FROM TRADE?

The range of trades that will benefit each country is based on the country’s opportunity cost of producing each good. 
The United States can produce 100 bushels of corn or 50 barrels of oil. For the United States, the opportunity cost of 
producing one barrel of oil is two bushels of corn. If we divide the numbers above by 50, we get the same ratio: one 
barrel of oil is equivalent to two bushels of corn, or (100/50 = 2 and 50/50 = 1). In a trade with Saudi Arabia, if the 
United States is going to give up 100 bushels of corn in exports, it must import at least 50 barrels of oil to be just 
as well off. Clearly, to gain from trade it needs to be able to gain more than a half barrel of oil for its bushel of 
corn—or why trade at all?

Recall that David Ricardo argued that if each country specializes in its comparative advantage, it will benefit from 
trade, and total global output will increase. How can we show gains from trade as a result of comparative advantage and 
specialization? Table 6 shows the output assuming that each country specializes  in  its  comparative  advantage  and  
produces  no  other  good.  This  is  100%  specialization. Specialization leads to an increase in total world 
production. (Compare the total world production in Table 3 to that in Table 6.)


Country                       Quantity produced after 100% specialization —
Oil (barrels)
Quantity produced after 100% specialization — Corn (busftels)
Saudi Arabia                100                                                                                         
  0
United States                 0                                                                                         
  100

Total World Production
100                                                                                         100
Table 6. How Specialization Expands Output
What if we did not have complete specialization, as in Table 6? Would there still be gains from trade? Consider another 
example, such as when the United States and Saudi Arabia start at C and C’, respec- tively,  as  shown  in  Figure  1.  
Consider  what  occurs  when  trade  is  allowed  and  the  United  States exports 20 bushels of corn to Saudi Arabia 
in exchange for 20 barrels of oil.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   727





























Figure 2. Production Possibilities Frontier in Saudi Arabia. Gains from trade of oil can increase only by achieving 
less from trade of corn. The opposite is true as well: The more gains from trade of corn, the fewer gains from trade of 
oil.

Starting at point C, reduce Saudi Oil production by 20 and exchange it for 20 units of corn to reach point D (see 
Figure 2). Notice that even without 100% specialization, if the “trading price,” in this case 20 barrels of oil for 20 
bushels of corn, is greater than the country’s opportunity cost, the Saudis will gain from trade. Indeed both countries 
consume more of both goods after specialized production and trade occurs.

Visit this website for trade-related data visualizations.

728                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 

KEY CONCEPTS AND SUMMARY

A country has an absolute advantage in those products in which it has a productivity edge over other countries; it 
takes fewer resources to produce a product. A country has a comparative advantage when a good can be produced at a 
lower cost in terms of other goods. Countries that specialize based on comparative advantage gain from trade.

SELF-CHECK QUESTIONS



1.    True or False: The source of comparative advantage must be natural elements like climate and mineral deposits. 
Explain.
2.    Brazil can produce 100 pounds of beef or 10 autos; in contrast the United States can produce 40 pounds of beef or 
30 autos. Which country has the absolute advantage in beef? Which country has the absolute advantage in producing 
autos? What is the opportunity cost of producing one pound of beef in Brazil? What is the opportunity cost of producing 
one pound of beef in the United States?
3.    In France it takes one worker to produce one sweater, and one worker to produce one bottle of wine. In Tunisia it 
takes two workers to produce one sweater, and three workers to produce one bottle of wine. Who has the absolute 
advantage in production of sweaters? Who has the absolute advantage in the production of wine? How can you tell?



REVIEW QUESTIONS



1.    What is absolute advantage? What is comparative advantage?
2.    Under what conditions does comparative advantage lead to gains from trade?
3.    What factors does Paul Krugman identify that supported the expansion of international trade in the 1800s?




CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS



1.    Are differences in geography behind the differences in absolute advantages?
2.    Why does the United States not have an absolute advantage in coffee?
3.    Look at Self-Check Question 3. Compute the opportunity costs of producing sweaters and wine in both France and 
Tunisia. Who has the lowest opportunity cost of producing sweaters and who has the lowest opportunity cost of producing 
wine? Explain what it means to have a lower opportunity cost.



PROBLEMS



France  and  Tunisia  both  have  Mediterranean  climates  that  are  excellent  for  producing/harvesting  green  
beans  and tomatoes.  In  France  it  takes  two  hours  for  each  worker  to  harvest  green  beans  and  two  hours  
to  harvest  a  tomato. Tunisian workers need only one hour to harvest the tomatoes but four hours to harvest green 
beans. Assume there are only two workers, one in each country, and each works 40 hours a week.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   729




a.    Draw a production possibilities frontier for each country. Hint: Remember the production possibility frontier is 
the maximum that all workers can produce at a unit of time which, in this problem, is a week.
b.    Identify which country has the absolute advantage in green beans and which country has the absolute advantage in 
tomatoes.
c.    Identify which country has the comparative advantage.
d.    How much would France have to give up in terms of tomatoes to gain from trade? How much would it have to give up 
in terms of green beans?



REFERENCES
Krugman, Paul R. Pop Internationalism. The MIT Press, Cambridge. 1996.

Krugman, Paul R. “What Do Undergrads Need to Know about Trade?” American Economic Review 83, no. 2. 1993. 23-26.

Ricardo, David. On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation. London: John Murray, 1817.

Ricardo, David. “On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation.” Library of Economics and Lib- erty. 
http://www.econlib.org/library/Ricardo/ricP.html.

GLOSSARY
absolute advantage when one country can use fewer resources to produce a good compared to another country; when a 
country is more productive compared to another country
gain from trade a country that can consume more than it can produce as a result of specialization
and trade

SOLUTIONS


Answers to Self-Cfteck Questions

1.    False. Anything that leads to different levels of productivity between two economies can be a source of 
comparative advantage. For example, the education of workers, the knowledge base of engineers and scientists in a 
country, the part of a split-up value chain where they have their specialized learning, economies of scale, and other 
factors can all determine comparative advantage.
2.    Brazil has the absolute advantage in producing beef and the United States has the absolute advantage in autos. 
The opportunity cost of producing one pound of beef is 1/10 of an auto; in the United States it is 3/4 of an auto.
3.    In answering questions like these, it is often helpful to begin by organizing the information in a table, such as 
in the following table. Notice that, in this case, the productivity of the countries is expressed in terms of how many 
workers it takes to produce a unit of a product.

730                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 




Country    One Sweater    One Bottle of wine

France        1 worker            1 worker

Tunisia       2 workers          3 workers
Table 7.

In this example, France has an absolute advantage in the production of both sweaters and wine. You can tell because it 
takes France less labor to produce a unit of the good.
