


26.3  INTRA-INDUSTRY  TRADE  BETWEEN  SIMILAR  ECONOMIES



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Identify at least two advantages of intra-industry trading

•    Explain the relationship between economies of scale and intra-industry trade



bsolute and comparative advantages explain a great deal about patterns of global trade. For example, they help to 
explain the patterns noted at the start of this chapter, like why you may be eating fresh fruit from Chile or Mexico, 
or why lower productivity regions like Africa and
Latin America are able to sell a substantial proportion of their exports to higher productivity regions like the 
European Union and North America. Comparative advantage, however, at least at first glance, does not seem especially 
well-suited to explain other common patterns of international trade.

THE PREVALENCE OF INTRA-INDUSTRY TRADE BETWEEN SIMILAR ECONOMIES

The  theory  of  comparative  advantage  suggests  that  trade  should  happen  between  economies  with large 
differences in opportunity costs of production. Roughly half of all world trade involves shipping goods between the 
fairly similar high-income economies of the United States, Canada, the European Union, Japan, Mexico, and China (see 
Table 14).

Country                                            U.S. Exports Go to …                                    U.S. Imports 
Come from …
European Union                             19.0%                                                                 21.0%
Canada                                              22.0%                                                               
  14.0%
Japan                                                    4.0%                                                           
         6.0%
Mexico                                              15.0%                                                               
  13.0%
China                                                 8.0%                                                              
      20.0%
Table 14. Where U.S. Exports Go and U.S. Imports Originate (2015) (Source: https://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/Press- 
Release/current_press_release/ft900.pdf)

Moreover, the theory of comparative advantage suggests that each economy should specialize to a degree in certain 
products, and then exchange those products. A high proportion of trade, however, is intra-industry trade—that is, trade 
of goods within the same industry from one country to another. For example, the United States produces and exports 
autos and imports autos. Table 15 shows some of the largest categories of U.S. exports and imports. In all of these 
categories, the United States is both

740                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


a substantial exporter and a substantial importer of goods from the same industry. In 2014, accord- ing to the Bureau 
of Economic Analysis, the United States exported $159 billion worth of autos, and imported $327 billion worth of autos. 
About 60% of U.S. trade and 60% of European trade is intra- industry trade.

Some U.S. Exports                      Quantity of Exports ($ billions)                           Quantity of Imports 
($ billions)
Autos                                               $146                                                                
               $327
Food and beverages                      $144                                                                            
   $126
Capital goods                                 $550                                                                      
         $551
Consumer goods                           $199                                                                           
    $558
Industrial supplies                         $507                                                                        
       $665
Other transportation                    $45                                                                             
    $55
Table 15. Some Intra-Industry U.S. Exports and Imports in 2014 (Source: http://www.bea.gov/newsreleases/international/ 
trade/tradnewsrelease.htm)

Why do similar high-income economies engage in intra-industry trade? What can be the economic benefit of having workers 
of fairly similar skills making cars, computers, machinery and other prod- ucts which are then shipped across the 
oceans to and from the United States, the European Union, and Japan? There are two reasons: (1) The division of labor 
leads to learning, innovation, and unique skills; and (2) economies of scale.

GAINS FROM SPECIALIZATION AND LEARNING

Consider the category of machinery, where the U.S. economy has considerable intra-industry trade. Machinery  comes  in  
many  varieties,  so  the  United  States  may  be  exporting  machinery  for  manu- facturing with wood, but importing 
machinery for photographic processing. The underlying reason why a country like the United States, Japan, or Germany 
produces one kind of machinery rather than another is usually not related to U.S., German, or Japanese firms and 
workers having generally higher or lower skills. It is just that, in working on very specific and particular products, 
firms in certain countries develop unique and different skills.

Specialization in the world economy can be very finely split. In fact, recent years have seen a trend in international 
trade called splitting up tfte value cftain. The value cftain describes how a good is pro- duced in stages. As 
indicated in the beginning of the chapter, the production of the iPhone involves the design and engineering of the 
phone in the United States, parts supplied from Korea, the assembly of the parts in China, and the advertising and 
marketing done in the United States. Thanks in large part to improvements in communication technology, sharing 
information, and transportation, it has become easier to split up the value chain. Instead of production in a single 
large factory, all of these steps  can  be  split  up  among  different  firms  operating  in  different  places  and  
even  different  coun- tries. Because firms split up the value chain, international trade often does not involve whole 
finished products like automobiles or refrigerators being traded between nations. Instead, it involves shipping more 
specialized goods like, say, automobile dashboards or the shelving that fits inside refrigerators. Intra-industry trade 
between similar countries produces economic gains because it allows workers and firms to learn and innovate on 
particular products—and often to focus on very particular parts of the value chain.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   741
Visit this website for some interesting information about the assembly of the iPhone.












ECONOMIES OF SCALE, COMPETITION, VARIETY

A second broad reason that intra-industry trade between similar nations produces economic gains involves economies of 
scale. The concept of economies of scale, as introduced in Cost and Industry Structure, means that as the scale of 
output goes up, average costs of production decline—at least up to a point. Figure 1 illustrates economies of scale for 
a plant producing toaster ovens. The horizontal axis of the figure shows the quantity of production by a certain firm 
or at a certain manufacturing plant. The vertical axis measures the average cost of production. Production plant S 
produces a small level of output at 30 units and has an average cost of production of $30 per toaster oven. Plant M 
pro- duces at a medium level of output at 50 units, and has an average cost of production of $20 per toaster oven. 
Plant L produces 150 units of output with an average cost of production of only $10 per toaster oven. Although plant V 
can produce 200 units of output, it still has the same unit cost as Plant L.

In this example, a small or medium plant, like S or M, will not be able to compete in the market with a large or a very 
large plant like L or V, because the firm that operates L or V will be able to produce and sell their output at a lower 
price. In this example, economies of scale operate up to point L, but beyond point L to V, the additional scale of 
production does not continue to reduce average costs of production.

The concept of economies of scale becomes especially relevant to international trade when it enables one or two large 
producers to supply the entire country. For example, a single large automobile fac- tory could probably supply all the 
cars purchased in a smaller economy like the United Kingdom or Belgium in a given year. However, if a country has only 
one or two large factories producing cars, and no international trade, then consumers in that country would have 
relatively little choice between kinds of cars (other than the color of the paint and other nonessential options). 
Little or no competi- tion will exist between different car manufacturers.

International trade provides a way to combine the lower average production costs that come from economies of scale and 
still have competition and variety for consumers. Large automobile factories in different countries can make and sell 
their products around the world. If the U.S. automobile mar- ket  was  made  up  of  only  General  Motors,  Ford,  and 
 Chrysler,  the  level  of  competition  and  con- sumer  choice  would  be  quite  a  lot  lower  than  when  U.S.  
carmakers  must  face  competition  from Toyota, Honda, Suzuki, Fiat, Mitsubishi, Nissan, Volkswagen, Kia, Hyundai, 
BMW, Subaru, and oth- ers.  Greater  competition  brings  with  it  innovation  and  responsiveness  to  what  
consumers  want. America’s car producers make far better cars now than they did several decades ago, and much of the 
reason is competitive pressure, especially from East Asian and European carmakers.

742                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 




















Figure 1. Economies  of Scale. Production Plant S, has an average cost of production of $30 per toaster oven. 
Production plant M has an average cost of production of $20 per toaster oven. Production plant L has an average cost of 
production of only $10 per toaster oven. Production plant V would still have an average cost of pro- duction of $10 per 
toaster oven. Thus, production plant M can pro- duce toaster ovens more cheaply than plant S because of economies of 
scale, and plants L or V can produce more cheaply than S or M because of economies of scale. However, the economies of 
scale end at an output level of 150. Plant V, despite being larger, cannot pro- duce more cheaply on average than plant 
L.
DYNAMIC COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE

The sources of gains from intra-industry trade between similar economies—namely, the learning that comes from a high 
degree of specialization and splitting up the value chain and from economies of scale—do not contradict the earlier 
theory of comparative advantage. Instead, they help to broaden the concept.

In intra-industry trade, the level of worker productivity is not determined by climate or geography. It is not even 
determined by the general level of education or skill. Instead, the level of worker produc- tivity is determined by how 
firms engage in specific learning about specialized products, including taking advantage of economies of scale. In this 
vision, comparative advantage can be dynamic—that is, it can evolve and change over time as new skills are developed 
and as the value chain is split up in new ways. This line of thinking also suggests that countries are not destined to 
have the same compar- ative advantage forever, but must instead be flexible in response to ongoing changes in 
comparative advantage.

KEY CONCEPTS AND SUMMARY

A large share of global trade happens between high-income economies that are quite similar in having well-educated  
workers  and  advanced  technology.  These  countries  practice  intra-industry  trade,  in which they import and 
export the same products at the same time, like cars, machinery, and comput-

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   743

ers. In the case of intra-industry trade between economies with similar income levels, the gains from trade come from 
specialized learning in very particular tasks and from economies of scale. Splitting up the value chain means that 
several stages of producing a good take place in different countries around the world.

SELF-CHECK QUESTIONS



1.    How can there be any economic gains for a country from both importing and exporting the same good, like cars?
2.    Table 16 shows how the average costs of production for semiconductors (the “chips” in computer memories) change 
as the quantity of semiconductors built at that factory increases.

a.    Based on these data, sketch a curve with quantity produced on the horizontal axis and average cost of production 
on the vertical axis. How does the curve illustrate economies of scale?
b.    If the equilibrium quantity of semiconductors demanded is 90,000, can this economy take full advantage of 
economies of scale? What about if quantity demanded is 70,000 semiconductors? 50,000 semiconductors? 30,000 
semiconductors?
c.    Explain how international trade could make it possible for even a small economy to take full advantage of 
economies of scale, while also benefiting from competition and the variety offered by several producers.

Quantity of Semiconductors    Average Total Cost

10,000                                              $8 each

20,000                                              $5 each

30,000                                              $3 each

40,000                                              $2 each

100,000                                            $2 each
Table 16.





REVIEW QUESTIONS



1.    What is intra-industry trade?
2.    What are the two main sources of economic gains from intra-industry trade?
3.    What is splitting up the value chain?




CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS



1.    Does intra-industry trade contradict the theory of comparative advantage?
2.    Do consumers benefit from intra-industry trade?
3.    Why might intra-industry trade seem surprising from the point of view of comparative advantage?

744                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 



PROBLEMS



1.    From earlier chapters you will recall that technological change shifts the average cost curves. Draw a graph 
showing how technological change could influence intra-industry trade.
2.    Consider two countries: South Korea and Taiwan. Taiwan can produce one million mobile phones per day at the cost 
of $10 per phone and South Korea can produce 50 million mobile phones at $5 per phone. Assume these phones are the same 
type and quality and there is only one price. What is the minimum price at which both countries will engage in trade?



REFERENCES

U.S.  Census  Bureau.  2015.  “U.S.  International  Trade  in  Goods  and  Services:  December  2014.” Accessed     
April     13,     2015.     http://www.bea.gov/newsreleases/international/trade/2015/pdf/ trad1214.pdf.

U.S.  Census  Bureau.  U.S.  Bureau  of  Economic  Analysis.  2015.  “U.S.  International  Trade  in  Goods and 
Services February 2015.” Accessed April 10, 2015. https://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/Press- 
Release/current_press_release/ft900.pdf.

Vernengo, Matias. “What Do Undergraduates Really Need to Know About Trade and Finance?” in Political  Economy  and 
Contemporary Capitalism:  Radical Perspectives  on Economic  Theory and Policy, ed. Ron Baiman, Heather Boushey, and 
Dawn Saunders. M. E. Sharpe Inc, 2000. Armonk. 177-183.

GLOSSARY
intra-industry trade international trade of goods within the same industry
splitting up tfte value cftain many of the different stages of producing a good happen in different geographic 
locations
value cftain how a good is produced in stages

SOLUTIONS


Answers to Self-Cfteck Questions

1.    There are a number of possible advantages of intra-industry trade. Both nations can take advantage of extreme 
specialization and learning in certain kinds of cars with certain traits, like gas-efficient cars, luxury cars, 
sport-utility vehicles, higher- and lower-quality cars, and so on. Moreover, nations can take advantage of economies of 
scale, so that large companies will compete against each other across international borders, providing the benefits of 
competition and variety to customers. This same argument applies to trade between U.S. states, where people often buy 
products made by people of other states, even though a similar product is made within the boundaries of their own 
state. All states—and all countries—can benefit from this kind of competition and trade.

2.                a.    Start by plotting the points on a sketch diagram and then drawing a line through them. The 
following figure illustrates the average costs of production of semiconductors.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   745




























Figure 2.


The curve illustrates economies of scale by showing that as the scale increases—that is, as produc- tion at this 
particular factory goes up—the average cost of production declines. The economies of scale exist up to an output of 
40,000 semiconductors; at higher outputs, the average cost of pro- duction does not seem to decline any further.
b.    At any quantity demanded above 40,000, this economy can take full advantage of economies of scale; that is, it 
can produce at the lowest cost per unit. Indeed, if the quantity demanded was quite high, like 500,000, then there 
could be a number of different factories all taking full advantage of economies of scale and competing with each other. 
If the quantity demanded falls below 40,000, then the economy by itself, without foreign trade, cannot take full 
advantage of economies of  scale.
c.    The simplest answer to this question is that the small country could have a large enough factory to take full 
advantage of economies of scale, but then export most of the output. For semiconductors, countries like Taiwan and 
Korea have recently fit this description. Moreover, this country could also import semiconductors from other countries 
which also have large factories, thus getting the benefits of competition and variety. A slightly more complex answer 
is that the country can get these benefits of economies of scale without producing semiconductors, but simply by buying 
semiconductors made at low cost around the world. An economy, especially a smaller country, may well end up 
specializing and producing a few items on a large scale, but then trading those items for other items produced on a 
large scale, and thus gaining the benefits  of economies of scale by trade, as well as by direct production.
