


27.4  HOW  TRADE  POLICY  IS  ENACTED:  GLOBALLY,  REGIONALLY, AND  NATIONALLY



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Explain the origin and role of the World Trade Organization (WTO) and General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 
(GATT)
•    Discuss the significance and provide examples of regional trading agreements

•    Analyze trade policy at the national level

•    Evaluate long-term trends in barriers to trade



hese  public  policy  arguments  about  how  nations  should  react  to  globalization  and  trade  are fought  out  at 
 several  levels:  at  the  global  level  through  the  World  Trade  Organization  and through regional trade 
agreements between pairs or groups of countries.

THE WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION
The World Trade Organization (WTO) was officially born in 1995, but its history is much longer. In the years after the 
Great Depression and World War II, there was a worldwide push to build institu- tions that would tie the nations of the 
world together. The United Nations officially came into exis- tence in 1945. The World Bank, which assists the poorest 
people in the world, and the International Monetary Fund, which addresses issues raised by international financial 
transactions, were both cre- ated in 1946. The third planned organization was to be an International Trade 
Organization, which would manage international trade. The United Nations was unable to agree to this. Instead, the Gen- 
eral Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), was established in 1947 to provide a forum in which nations could come 
together to negotiate reductions in tariffs and other barriers to trade. In 1995, the GATT was transformed into the 
WTO.

The GATT process was to negotiate an agreement to reduce barriers to trade, sign that agreement, pause for a while, and 
then start negotiating the next agreement. The rounds of talks in the GATT, and now the WTO, are shown in Table 6. 
Notice that the early rounds of GATT talks took a relatively short  time, included  a small  number  of countries, and  
focused almost  entirely on reducing  tariffs. Since the 1970s, however, rounds of trade talks have taken years, 
included a large number of coun- tries, and an ever-broadening range of issues.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   783

Year           Place or Name of Round
Main Subjects                                                                                                           
     Number of
Countries Involved
1947           Geneva                   Tariff reduction                                                                
                                              23
1949           Annecy                   Tariff reduction                                                                
                                              13
1951           Torquay                  Tariff reduction                                                                
                                              38
1956           Geneva                   Tariff reduction                                                                
                                              26
1960–61    Dillon round         Tariff reduction                                                                        
                                      26
1964–67    Kennedy round    Tariffs, anti-dumping measures                                                              
                   62
1973–79    Tokyo round         Tariffs, nontariff barriers                                                              
                               102

1986–94    Uruguay round    Tariffs, nontariff barriers, services, intellectual property, dispute
settlement, textiles, agriculture, creation of WTO
2001–        Doha round          Agriculture, services, intellectual property, competition, investment, environment, 
dispute settlement
Table 6. The Negotiating Rounds of GATT and the World Trade Organization

123

147

The sluggish pace of GATT negotiations led to an old joke that GATT really stood for Gentleman’s Agreement to Talk and 
Talk. The slow pace of international trade talks, however, is understandable, even sensible. Having dozens of nations 
agree to any treaty is a lengthy process. GATT often set up separate trading rules for certain industries, like 
agriculture, and separate trading rules for certain countries, like the low-income countries. There were rules, 
exceptions to rules, opportunities to opt out of rules, and precise wording to be fought over in every case. Like the 
GATT before it, the WTO is not a world government, with power to impose its decisions on others. The total staff of the 
WTO in 2014 is 640 people and its annual budget (as of 2014) is $197 million, which makes it smaller in size than many 
large universities.

REGIONAL TRADING AGREEMENTS
There are different types of economic integration across the globe, ranging from free trade agree- ments, in which 
participants allow each other’s imports without tariffs or quotas, to common mar- kets, in which participants have a 
common external trade policy as well as free trade within the group, to full economic unions, in which, in addition to 
a common market, monetary and fiscal policies are coordinated. Many nations belong both to the World Trade Organization 
and to regional trading agreements.

The best known of these regional trading agreements is the European Union. In the years after World War II, leaders of 
several European nations reasoned that if they could tie their economies together more closely, they might be more 
likely to avoid another devastating war. Their efforts began with a free trade association, evolved into a common 
market, and then transformed into what is now a full economic union, known as the European Union. The EU, as it is 
often called, has a number of goals. For example, in the early 2000s it introduced a common currency for Europe, the 
euro, and phased out most of the former national forms of money like the German mark and the French franc, though a few 
have retained their own currency. Another key element of the union is to eliminate barriers to the mobility of goods, 
labor, and capital across Europe.

For the United States, perhaps the best-known regional trading agreement is the Nortft American Free Trade Agreement 
(NAFTA). The United States also participates in some less-prominent regional

784                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


trading agreements, like the Caribbean Basin Initiative, which offers reduced tariffs for imports from these countries, 
and a free trade agreement with Israel.

The world has seen a flood of regional trading agreements in recent years. About 100 such agreements are now in place. 
A few of the more prominent ones are listed in Table 7. Some are just agreements to continue talking; others set 
specific goals for reducing tariffs, import quotas, and nontariff barriers. One economist described the current trade 
treaties as a “spaghetti bowl,” which is what a map with lines connecting all the countries with trade treaties looks 
like.

There is concern among economists who favor free trade that some of these regional agreements may promise free trade, 
but actually act as a way for the countries within the regional agreement to try to limit trade from anywhere else. In 
some cases, the regional trade agreements may even conflict with the broader agreements of the World Trade 
Organization.

Trade Agreements    Participating Countries

Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)

European Union (EU)

North America Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)
Latin American Integration Association (LAIA)
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
Southern African Development Community (SADC)

Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, People’s Republic of China, Hong Kong, China, Indonesia, Japan, Republic of Korea, 
Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Russia, Singapore, Chinese Taipei, Thailand, United 
States, Vietnam

Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, 
Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, 
Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom


Canada, Mexico, United States



Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Columbia, Ecuador, Mexico, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, Venezuela


Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Vietnam


Angola, Botswana, Congo, Lesotho, Malawi, Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Seychelles, South Africa, Swaziland, 
Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Table 7. Some Regional Trade Agreements


TRADE POLICY AT THE NATIONAL LEVEL

Yet another dimension of trade policy, along with international and regional trade agreements, hap- pens at the 
national level. The United States, for example, imposes import quotas on sugar, because of a fear that such imports 
would drive down the price of sugar and thus injure domestic sugar produc- ers. One of the jobs of the United States 
Department of Commerce is to determine if imports from other countries are being dumped. The United States 
International Trade Commission—a govern- ment agency—determines whether domestic industries have been substantially 
injured by the dump- ing, and if so, the president can impose tariffs that are intended to offset the unfairly low 
price.

In the arena of trade policy, the battle often seems to be between national laws that increase protec- tionism and 
international agreements that try to reduce protectionism, like the WTO. Why would a country pass laws or negotiate 
agreements to shut out certain foreign products, like sugar or textiles,

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   785
while simultaneously negotiating to reduce trade barriers in general? One plausible answer is that international trade 
agreements offer a method for countries to restrain their own special interests. A member of Congress can say to an 
industry lobbying for tariffs or quotas on imports: “Sure would like to help you, but that pesky WTO agreement just 
won’t let me.”
If consumers are the biggest losers from trade, why do they not fight back? The quick answer is because it is easier to 
orga- nize a small group of people around a narrow interest versus a large group that has diffuse interests. This is a 
question about trade policy theory. Visit this website and read the article by Jonathan Rauch.












LONG-TERM TRENDS IN BARRIERS TO TRADE

In newspaper headlines, trade policy appears mostly as disputes and acrimony. Countries are almost constantly 
threatening to challenge the “unfair” trading practices of other nations. Cases are brought to the dispute settlement 
procedures of the WTO, the European Union, NAFTA, and other regional trading agreements. Politicians in national 
legislatures, goaded on by lobbyists, often threaten to pass bills that will “establish a fair playing field” or 
“prevent unfair trade”—although most such bills seek to accomplish these high-sounding goals by placing more 
restrictions on trade. Protesters in the streets may object to specific trade rules or to the entire practice of 
international trade.

Through all the controversy, the general trend in the last 60 years is clearly toward lower barriers to trade. The 
average level of tariffs on imported products charged by industrialized countries was 40% in 1946. By 1990, after 
decades of GATT negotiations, it was down to less than 5%. Indeed, one of the reasons that GATT negotiations shifted 
from focusing on tariff reduction in the early rounds to a broader agenda was that tariffs had been reduced so 
dramatically there was not much more to do in that area. U.S. tariffs have followed this general pattern: After rising 
sharply during the Great Depres- sion, tariffs dropped off to less than 2% by the end of the century. Although measures 
of import quotas and nontariff barriers are less exact than those for tariffs, they generally appear to be at lower 
levels, too.

Thus,  the  last  half-century  has  seen  both  a  dramatic  reduction  in  government-created  barriers  to trade, 
such as tariffs, import quotas, and nontariff barriers, and also a number of technological devel- opments that have 
made international trade easier, like advances in transportation, communication, and information management. The result 
has been the powerful surge of international trade.

KEY CONCEPTS AND SUMMARY

Trade policy is determined at many different levels: administrative agencies within government, laws passed by the 
legislature, regional negotiations between a small group of nations (sometimes just two),

786                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


and global negotiations through the World Trade Organization. During the second half of the twenti- eth century, trade 
barriers have, in general, declined quite substantially in the United States economy and in the global economy. One 
reason why countries sign international trade agreements to commit themselves to free trade is to give themselves 
protection against their own special interests. When an industry lobbies for protection from foreign producers, 
politicians can point out that, because of the trade treaty, their hands are tied.

SELF-CHECK QUESTIONS



1.    What is the difference between a free trade association, a common market, and an economic union?
2.    Why would countries promote protectionist laws, while also negotiate for freer trade internationally?
3.    What might account for the dramatic increase in international trade over the past 50 years?




REVIEW QUESTIONS



1.    Name several of the international treaties where countries negotiate with each other over trade policy.
2.    What is the general trend of trade barriers over recent decades: higher, lower, or about the same?
3.    If opening up to free trade would benefit a nation, then why do nations not just eliminate their trade barriers, 
and not bother with international trade negotiations?



CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS



1.    Why do you think that the GATT rounds and, more recently, WTO negotiations have become longer and more difficult 
to resolve?
2.    An economic union requires giving up some political autonomy to succeed. What are some examples of political 
power countries must give up to be members of an economic union?



REFERENCES

United States Department of Labor. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2015. “Employment Situation Sum- mary.” Accessed April 
1, 2015. http://www.bls.gov/news.release/empsit.nr0.htm.

United States Department of Commerce. “About the Department of Commerce.” Accessed January 6, 2014. 
http://www.commerce.gov/about-department-commerce.

United  States  International  Trade  Commission.  “About  the  USITC.”  Accessed  January  6,  2014. 
http://www.usitc.gov/press_room/about_usitc.htm.

GLOSSARY
common market economic agreement between countries to allow free trade in goods, services, labor, and financial capital 
between members while having a common external trade policy

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   787

economic union economic agreement between countries to allow free trade between members, a common external trade 
policy, and coordinated monetary and fiscal policies
free trade agreement economic agreement between countries to allow free trade between members
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) forum in which nations could come together to negotiate reductions in 
tariffs and other barriers to trade; the precursor to the World Trade Organization

SOLUTIONS


Answers to Self-Cfteck Questions

1.    A free trade association offers free trade between its members, but each country can determine its own  trade 
policy outside the association. A common market requires a common external trade policy in addition to free trade 
within the group. An economic union is a common market with coordinated fiscal and monetary policy.
2.    International agreements can serve as a political counterweight to domestic special interests, thereby preventing 
stronger protectionist measures.
3.    Reductions in tariffs, quotas, and other trade barriers, improved transportation, and communication media have 
made people more aware of what is available in the rest of the world.
