


3.4  DECONSTRUCTING  THE  ORTHODOX  DEFINITION  OF ECONOMICS



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Discuss the orthodox definition of economics.

•    Understand the organization of the orthodox definition of economics.

•    Describe the paradigmatic direction of orthodox economics.



ometimes, in order to better understand how something works it is useful to break apart, or deconstruct  (de-engineer), 
 the  object  of  examination.   During  periods  of  war,  oppositional armies  are  known  to  commandeer  their  
opponent’s  weaponry  in  order  to  de-engineer,  or deconstruct, the equipment.   The United States Army Air Forces 
Operation LUSTY (Luftwaffe Secret Technology) sought to capture German technology both during and after World War Two. 
By taking apart a piece of equipment piece by piece the examiner gains insight into both how the equipment operates as 
well as its weaknesses.  In times of war, stealing good ideas and developing better ways to destroy an opponent’s 
weapons can be invaluable.  The object of deconstruction does not have to be physical or mechanical for the process to 
be useful; deconstructing an idea is also a valuable process for enriching understanding.  Regarding the orthodox 
definition of economics, as it is the object of
both examination and critique, this same type of deconstruction will also be useful.

In the first chapter of this text an example of the orthodox definition of economics was provided to the reader.  The 
definition provided, similar to variations on the orthodox definition of economics in most textbooks, owes its origins 
to a famous early 20th century economist, Lionel Robbins.  Rob- bins famously defined economics as, “the science which 
studies human behaviour as a relationship between  ends  and  scarce means  which  have  alternative  uses.”   
Contemporary  orthodox  economic textbooks tend to utilize a generic variation on Robbins’ definition, often 
stipulating something akin to “Economics is the study of the allocation of limited resources over unlimited wants.”  In 
order to examine the appropriateness, or lack thereof, of the orthodox definition of economics, a closer exam- ination 
of the definition is necessary.

One approach toward deconstructing the orthodox definition of economics is to define, specifically within the context 
of the orthodox economic meaning of the words, the other terms within the defin- ition.  Given the organization of the 
orthodox definition, with wants being conditioned by the avail- ability of resources, one possible starting point for 
deconstruction is the orthodox definition of the term resources.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                      61

As  should  be  noted  from  chapter  two  of  this  text,  the  orthodox  economic  definition  of  resources 
emphasizes that resources are those things that are needed for production.  While other resources may  be  relevant,  
orthodox  economics  nearly  exclusively  focuses  on  Land,Labor,  andCapital  as  the essential resources necessary 
for production.  When more resources are present, more production is possible and when fewer resources are present, 
less production is possible.  Obviously, if resources are unlimited, then production would be unlimited and all wants, 
and presumably needs, could be met. Of course, as noted by the definition, resources are assumed to be limited, 
otherwise referred to as scarce.

The terms limited or scarce are fairly self-explanatory.  By definition, if something is scarce or limited, then there 
is only so much of the thing in question.  In this case, orthodox economists are assuming that Land, Labor, and Capital 
are in some way constrained.  In many ways this is a sensible assump- tion as the planet we reside upon has only so 
much available land, human population, albeit signifi- cant, is limited to 7.4 billion people, and capital, consisting 
of tools and equipment, are limited because only so many machines are available at any one time. Given limited or 
scarce resources, the ability for wants to be met must be limited.

Limits  to wants are an important  consideration.  Given the orthodox definition of economics,  the term wants  could, 
presumably, represent  any and all things people could want.  However, because wants are deemed to be conditioned by 
resources and what resources are capable of producing, it stands to reason that what orthodox economics means by its 
use of the term “wants” are those things that are produced by resources.  Since resources are factors of production, 
land, labor, and capital, then “wants” must be those things that are produced by land, labor, and capital—essentially 
products (goods and services).

But why do people want products?  According to orthodox economics people want products because people  garner  
satisfaction  or  utility  (happiness)  from  their  consumption  of  products.   Given  that wants are considered to 
be unlimited, which is to say endless or infinite, then, by logical continuation, people must have an endless desire 
for utility or happiness.  Importantly, considering that wants must be the byproduct of the products produced by 
resources, orthodox economics is arguing that people have an endless desire for happiness and that happiness is 
derived, apparently exclusively, from the products that people acquire.  Additionally, consistent with the circular 
logic of orthodox economics, if human beings have unlimited wants, then resources must be scarce.  All wants can never 
be met, rendering resources on a finite planet scarce, if wants are endless.

In summary, given the above set of definitions the following if-then statement provides a summary of the belief of 
orthodox economists. If wants are unlimited and resources are used to produce the things that people want, those things 
being products for consumption, then economists assume people have an insatiable desire to acquire products (aka. 
inherently greedy).  Additionally, if, presumably, prod- ucts bring happiness and people have an endless desire for 
products, then it must be that people have an endless desire to be happy.



3.5  A  CRITICAL  EXAMINATION  OF  THE  ORTHODOX  DEFINITION OF  ECONOMICS  AND  ITS  RESULTANT  IMPACTS



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Discuss critiques of the orthodox definition of economics.

•    Understand the differences between facts and beliefs.

•    Describe the differences between needs and wants.

•    Understand the interconnection between facts and values.

•    Compare the differences between scarcity and surplus.

•    Compare the differences between and individual and social approach to economics.

•    Identify the relationship between unlimited wants and environmental degradation.



hapter one presented the orthodox case for utilizing the limited resource, unlimited want def- inition.  For economists 
outside of the orthodox paradigm, however, the orthodox story con- tains  troubling  elements.   While  potentially  
insightful  in  certain  instances,  the  orthodox
definition is also potentially misleading in terms of clarifying what it is that is actually happening in the economy.  
What follows are, from a heterodox (alternative) economic perspective, four critiques of the orthodox definition of 
economics and its implications.


ARE UNLIMITED WANTS (AND THEREFORE SCARCE RESOURCES) A FACT OF LIFE OR A BELIEF?

A fact is something immutable, it just is, whereas a belief is something that a person or people think, whether  there  
is  evidence  to  support  their  contention  or  not.  An  atheist  or  a  theist  cannot  prove their beliefs, God 
may or may not exist, but there is no way to empirically prove either view.  Athe- ism and theism are beliefs, not 
facts.  In terms of belief-based versus fact-based analyses in the realm of economics, noted 20th century political 
economist Karl Polanyi criticized the orthodox (neoclas- sical) scarcity story as scarcity assumed within the mind of 
the orthodox economist. In other words, scarcity is a belief of the orthodox economist, not a fact.

Outside of orthodox economics, such as within heterodox (alternative) economic circles as well as the  other  social  
science  disciplines,  the  issue  of  scarcity  as  induced  by  unlimited  wants  has  been extensively evaluated and 
re-evaluated.  For many theorists, the concept of unlimited/endless want

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                      63

of material items is simply not an immutable fact present in all times and places among all human beings.  Among 
anthropologists, for example, there is a rich history of ethnographic studies docu- menting ways in which small-scale, 
non-market oriented economies appear to behave differently than orthodox economists predict.  One such anthropologist, 
Marshall Sahlins, explicitly notes that people residing in hunter-gatherer societies, while viewed as deeply 
impoverished by the standards of people residing in advanced industrial economies, are actually quite affluent because 
“all the people’s wants are easily satisfied.”  For Sahlins and other anthropologists, the hunter-gatherer’s affluence 
is not one of vast material abundance, but rather a happiness shaped by being contented with having basic needs and 
wants met.  By having little and demanding little, a successful hunt can yield great want satisfac- tion.

Borrowing from psychology, there is also a sub-discipline of economics known as Happiness Eco- nomics.  Utilizing 
survey data, theorists pursuing the study of happiness have repeatedly found that people that focus on the goals of 
monetary gain and material benefits tend to be less happy than peo- ple who are less focused or not focused on those 
goals.  It seems that for every endless maximizer of products, there are many more people that are apt to be content 
and satisfied with far fewer material items, particularly if fewer material items mean a greater level of interpersonal 
satisfaction like love, the respect of peers, affection, family fulfillment, and relationship fulfillment.  Apparently, 
these and other equally non-material but important psychological factors are more important to the pursuit of happiness 
than is monetary wealth.


1.   CAN FACTS AND VALUES REALLY BE SEPARATED?

Utilizing beliefs, ideas, or subjective values is not, however, an unacceptable practice for most social scientists.  
Orthodox economics insists that facts and values are to remain separate, otherwise known as positive economics.  The 
orthodox fact/value dichotomy is, however, misleading.  Nearly all the- orists apply some sort of pre-analytical value 
to their analysis.  The very use of assumptions implies that some kind of value-based decision making process was 
utilized by the theorist.  The irony in this instance is that orthodox economics insists that it is a fact based 
science when, in fact, it utilizes value based (normative) propositions.

Within  their  very  definition,  orthodox  economists  employ  subjective  values,  such  as  the  desire  to maximize 
acquisition (an assumption, or belief, not a fact), to frame their vision of the discipline of economics.  Once again, 
the use of subjective values on their own is not the problem or even a prob- lem (contrary to the orthodox perspective 
that economics should be a positive science), but it becomes a problem when a definition states something as “is” as 
opposed to “believed.”  Compare the follow- ing phrases, “the study of economics is” and “one belief is that economics 
studies.”  The first phrase leads the reader to believe that economists deal in absolute facts while the second phrase 
implies that some economists may have settled on an accepted set of ideas, but those ideas remain up for debate. An 
honest presentation of the orthodox definition of economics would note its subjective, normative, non-positive nature.


SCARCITY OR SURPLUS?

There is another fundamental question that Polanyi’s critique alludes to: does scarcity as perceived by

64                     ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


the mind actually mean that there is a scarcity resources?  For Polanyi, the orthodox definition of eco- nomics is 
circular, it has neither a beginning nor an end, just continuous scarcity because of limitless want.  After all, if 
human beings have unlimited wants, then resources have to be scarce, there is sim- ply no way for all wants to be met 
if wants are endless.  Close inspection of the orthodox definition of economics makes it clear that the picture of the 
homeless man on the bench presented in chapter one is not actually a result of scarcity, at least not as scarcity is 
defined within the orthodox tradition.

Again, recall that the orthodox definition of economics describes scarcity as resulting from endless “want.”  Endless  
want  does  not  mean  that  there  are  not  enough  resources  available  to  fulfill  all  of humanities basic 
needs.  Nor does endless “want” mean that many wants cannot be met given avail- able resources.  Obviously the man on 
the park bench may have some very legitimate wants (certainly needs, like adequate shelter), but is he on the bench 
because there are not enough resources available to make sure his basic needs, such as a home, or other wants, are met? 
 At least in terms of available housing, the answer to this question is an overwhelming no.   According to the U.S. 
Department of Housing and Urban Development on any given night in January of 2015 564,708 people were home- less.  At 
the same time, the number of vacant residential properties in the United States numbered approximately 1.4 million.

The homeless man’s lack of housing is not the byproduct of scarcity, at least not by the definition of scarcity that 
many people are accustomed.  Rather, the homeless man on the bench is the byproduct of either misallocated resources or 
a maldistribution of production.

Homelessness (or house-less-ness) is not the only instance in which the orthodox economic scarcity story breaks down.  
There are other well documented instances.  One particularly disturbing instance relates to malnourishment and general 
starvation.  According to the World Hunger Education Service (WHES) around the world there is enough food produced on 
an annualized basis to ensure that every person is adequately nourished.  In fact, the sheer amount of calories per 
person generated by global food  production  has  risen  since  the  early  1960s  through  the  mid-2000s,  with  the  
amount  of  per capita calories produced being enough to adequately feed an adult in both developed and developing 
economies.  At the same time, “The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization estimates that about 795 million 
people of the 7.3 billion people in the world, or one in nine, were suffering from chronic undernourishment in 
2014-2016.”

http://www.fao.org/3/a-i4674e.pdf

Again, this instance of basic needs not being met may be perceived as a situation of scarcity.  However, as  reported  
by  the  WHES,  poverty  is  the  overwhelming  driver  of  global  malnourishment.   While poverty implies a scarcity 
of income, possibly due to a scarcity of employment possibilities, the actual product  that  resolves  malnourishment,  
food  is  produced  in  enough  abundance  to  adequately  feed everyone.  Once again, basic human needs are going 
unmet and this has nothing at all to do with the scarcity of resources.

An interesting outcome of reorienting the definition of economics away from the scarcity story, when evaluated on what 
is actually available, is not that resources are endless or that all wants can neces- sarily be met, but that it is 
apparent that there are often more than enough resources to meet all of humanity’s material needs as well as many, 
many, many of humanities wants.  Reoriented this way the story of economics becomes a story of surplus and abundance, 
rather than shortfall and hardship.  A much less dismal, and likely more realistic, science indeed!

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                      65



1.   NEEDS VERSUS WANTS

A distinction must be made between needs and wants, as they are decidedly not the same.

Need  –  Reflects  something  that  is  necessary  for  a  human  being  to  sustain  basic  physical  and  
psychological health.

One fairly well known measure defining needs is Maslow’s hierarchy of needs.  In Maslow’s hierarchy basic physiological 
needs, like food, water, air, shelter, safety, must be met first, followed by psycho- logical needs, such as love and 
affection, with self-actualizing needs being met last.  Importantly, while Maslow’s hierarchy provides a framework, it 
must also be understood that the concept of need evolves depending on the social circumstances and technological make 
up of a given economy.  In the absence of basic physiological needs being met, a person’s life will suffer to the 
degree that in many instances their life may be shortened.  For example, homeless people have shorter life spans, 42 to 
52 years, than non-homeless people, 78 years.

A want is different from a need.

Want – is something that is desired, but also not necessary for an individual to live and function in a society.

For example, while basic shelter with appropriate utilities such as gas, electric, water, sanitation, and basic 
cooking, cleaning, and food storage appliances will generally fulfill basic needs, additional prod- ucts such as 
dishwashers, large screen televisions, hot tubs, and many, many other products are wants.

To further distinguish between needs and wants, consider the following example.  In some communi- ties the existing 
transportation infrastructure is nearly completely and exclusively automobile depen- dent.  In order for a person to 
have a reasonable expectation of functioning, physically, socially, and economically in this socioeconomic environment, 
a person will need access to an automobile.  In this case, a functional automobile is, in fact, a need, but a high end 
SUV is not a need, it is a w ant.

Based on the orthodox definition of economics it is clear that the orthodoxy is interested in wants rather than needs.  
The absence of needs from the orthodox definition is a curiosity.  There are several possible reasons why needs are not 
explicitly referenced in the orthodox definition.  Two possible rea- sons will be addressed here.  First, it is 
possible that orthodox economists do not differentiate between needs and wants, thus all needs really are just wants.  
Second, orthodox economists may be assuming that needs are already being met.  If basic needs are met, then it is not 
only possible but reasonable to study what people want.

In  critique,  the  orthodox  merger  of  needs  and  wants  seems  to  produce  potentially  misleading insights.  
While one can certainly make the argument that all people want their needs to be met, such that a need is nothing more 
than a type of want, basic needs must be met or the study of additional wants becomes useless as there can be no other 
wants.  Additionally, even if it is assumed that needs are being met, this does not actually mean that needs are being 
met in the world where people really live.  If needs are not being met, can orthodox economics be trusted to study the 
situation and then prescribe a solution that might ease human suffering?  The answer to this question is unclear as the 
orthodox definition of economics does not provide direction toward the study of needs.

66                     ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 




INDIVIDUAL PERSPECTIVE OR SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE?

As a discipline, economics is categorized as a social science.  The social sciences, in general, seek to develop 
understandings about human interactions on a social level.  For example, an anthropologist may be interested in 
understanding the role of culture as it influences human behavior.  Culture can be represented as social norms, 
rituals, and/or customs that different groups of people, mostly collec- tively, participate in performing.  Another 
example of a social science is political science.  A political scientist may be interested in examining political 
institutions and legal structures.  In order to bet- ter understand why individuals or larger social groups of people 
exhibit certain behaviors, an under- standing of how a society structures its laws, the rewards or penalties people 
encounter as a result of socially derived rules, is essential.

For the orthodox economist, however, the social element of economics is secondary to that of the individual.   Again,  
the  orthodox  definition  of  economics  gives  the  orthodox  economist  direction. Recall, the focus of the orthodox 
economist is on want fulfillment with wants being satisfied by goods and services produced by resources.  The reason 
products are wanted is because products, presum- ably,  provide  the  recipient  with  happiness,  or  utility.   Since 
 people  are  presumed  to  have  endless wants, people are also presumed to have an endless desire for utility.  In 
many ways orthodox eco- nomics is really just the study of the maximization of utility.  But how is utility measured?  
Well, it’s not.  Utility is subjective, it is in the eye of the beholder.  As such, the study of utility maximization 
is the study of individual choices.  After all, the only way to know what makes a person happy, or bring- ing the most 
utility is to evaluate the consumption choices that people make.  As such, the focus of orthodox economics is that of 
individual choice making.

For some in the orthodox economic community, the focus on the individual is a conscious choice, purposeful  and  known, 
 and  often  times  affectionately  referred  to  as  “metftodological individual- ism.”  A methodology is an approach 
for addressing concerns that a discipline believes are essential. Methodological individualism is a method anchored to 
examining the individual, placing front and center the issue most essential to that of the orthodox economist: 
individual decision-making.  But if the individual is of utmost importance, then the role of social is much less clear 
within orthodox eco- nomics.  This is not to say that the larger society is ignored by orthodox economists.  For 
orthodox economics the social does emerge but, consistent with their dedication to studying individual choice, it is as 
a byproduct of individual maximizing behavior.  Once individuals pursue their own self-inter- est, the orthodox 
economist is tasked with simply summing or aggregating the individual behavior and the result is the larger social 
outcome.

For those outside of the orthodox economic tradition, many important considerations are seemingly lost by the direction 
of orthodox economic analysis.  Take for example the question of how broader societal norms as a function of social 
institutions may have influenced the behavior of individuals.  By assuming away the social and focusing exclusively on 
the individual, the orthodox economist will be apt to ignore such issues as how social institutions may have influenced 
individual behavior such that it is now not prone to maximizing individual acquisition.  In other words, let’s say 
people really don’t just look out for themselves all of the time, seeking to acquire as many products for themselves as 
they can, but instead, people behave such that they are concerned for the well-being of others, maybe because the norms 
of their society encourage a less than self-centered set of behaviors.  Non-acquisi- tive, non-self-interested 
individual behavior tends to be outside of the scope of orthodox economics,

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                      67

but it is not outside the scope of actual human economic interactions.  For many non-orthodox econ- omists, the absence 
of a clear social perspective limits the understandings available to the practitioner of methodological individualism.


1.   UTILITY AS EVERYTHING, UTILITY AS NOTHING

Some orthodox economists have objected to the idea that they are assuming that people are greedy, only wanting products 
or those things that can get products, namely resources or money as money is what is used to perform purchases.  One 
orthodox economic argument that has emerged claims that the orthodox economic model can be extended to include the 
story of “enligfttened self-inter- est.”  Enlightened self-interest is the idea that it can be in one’s self-interest 
to act to benefit others. In  some  regards  enlightened  self-interest  can  be  interpreted  as  someone  serving  
society  such  that through their service society is better-off and, subsequently, as a member of society, the 
individual then benefits.

A common example of enlightened self-interest is charitable giving.  Charitable giving is the opposite of individual 
acquisition as the person giving to charity is presumably giving away something of per- sonal  value  for  themselves  
so  that  someone  else  can  benefit.   Orthodox  economists  argue  that  the reason a person engages in charity, or 
another type of enlightened self-interest, is because they gain utility from knowing that they have done something that 
is perceived as “good” for society.

There are two problems that become evident when the orthodox enlightened self-interest argument is compared to the 
orthodox definition of economics.  First, enlightened self-interest is inconsistent with the basic premise described by 
the orthodox definition of economics.  To once again reiterate, the  orthodox  definition  of  economics  is  
stipulating  that  people’s  unlimited  wants  are  fulfilled  by resources and resources are utilized to produce 
products, thus want fulfillment is synonymous with product acquisition.  Returning to the charitable giving example, it 
is clear that charitable giving is not product acquisition but rather product dissipation.  Thus orthodox economics 
cannot, without contradicting itself, apply its definition of economics to a story of enlightened self-interest.  
Another definition of economics would be necessary to account for human behavioral actions associated with what is 
perceived as enlightened self-interest, or really any human action that is not associated with the acquisition of 
products.

Some thoughtful orthodox economists have recognized the contradiction between their definition of economics and the 
idea of enlightened self-interest.  As a result, some orthodox economists have re- cast their position arguing that 
utility can be derived from anything, not just material products.  In other words, for the orthodox economist all human 
actions and behaviors are driven around utility maximization and thus the study of economics is really the study of 
utility maximization.  When re- cast in this light, however, the second problem appears.  If all actions provide a 
person with utility, and all people are utility maximizers, then any action can be said to be utility maximizing, 
otherwise the person would not engage in the action.  Based on this construction, the orthodox economist would be 
reduced to observing what people do and then proclaiming that it must be in their best interest.  As a critical 
thinking exercise an important question now emerges: when exactly does orthodox econom- ics become a social science?  
Saying that people do as they do because otherwise they wouldn’t do it does not represent science, it has very little 
empirical function. It is also not focused on the social as it does not account for any social factors that may 
influence or disrupt individual behavior. And it pro-

68                     ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


vides almost no predictive possibilities other than identifying what might happen in the future based on what has 
happened in the past.  Once again, confronted with such limitations many economists suggest that another definition of 
economics may be more substantive and useful.




BREAKOUT BOX – WHAT ABOUT BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS?

Because  people  frequently  engage  in  behaviors  that  are  not  considered  rational,  that  is  to  say  
individually  acquisitive, orthodox economics has been targeted for criticism that their models do not accurately 
depict the real world.  In response a sub-field of orthodox economics, behavioral economics, has developed that seeks 
to utilize experiments and psychology to better understand actual human behavior.  Behavioral economics tends to start 
from the position that otherwise-rational, optimizing people will deviate from standard orthodox economic actions 
because people can be influenced by non-eco- nomic factors, such as religious beliefs or cultural norms

A common approach to identifying  the factors that condition individual  choice-making is to run experiments  that test 
human response to incentives.  A controlled experiment provides researchers with empirical, data-driven evidence as to 
how and why people may not respond to opportunities for individual gain in the ways that orthodox economics predicts.

For many outside of orthodox economics,  the development of behavioral economics  is a step in right direction for the 
larger science of economics.  Having evidence and being able to explain a wider range of phenomena rather than simply 
stipulating that people do as they do otherwise they wouldn’t do it, appears to move the discipline of economics toward 
more realistic insights.  At the same time, critiques of orthodox economics are also apt to note that behavioral 
economics still does not go far enough with its approach.  Behavioral economics emphasizes an analysis that begins with 
the standard orthodox isolated maximizing individual and then searches for deviations from this behavior.  By the very 
nature of their focus, behavioral economics under-emphasizes social considerations.  As such, data may be derived that 
draws out the idea that an individual is making choices that are influenced by social institutions, but absent the 
study of those social institu- tions, the theorist is possibly still in the dark as to why the social institutions 
elicit the response that they do on the part of the individual.  The result is that behavioral economics broadens the 
scope of economic inquiry but, for those outside of orthodox economics, it is still too narrow of an approach.




LIMITLESS VERSUS LIMITS: THE IMPLICATIONS FOR THE HEALTH OF THE PLANETARY ENVI- RONMENT

The  final  critique  presented  here  may  be  the  most  important  in  terms  of  its  implications  for  the future 
of humanity.  The Earth is a finite biosphere.  There is simply only so much atmosphere, land, water, minerals, ores, 
and other natural resources within the bounds of the planet.  In this way, the Earth really is representative of a 
circumstance of scarcity.  Certainly improved efficiency is capable of extending the productive capability of the 
available natural resources, but this does not change the fact that there is a limit to how much is actually available.

Regardless, for many orthodox economists, the principle of endless growth is unquestionably desir- able and it is 
downright sacrilegious to doubt the merits of endless economic growth.  Consider the orthodox definition of economics 
and its emphasis on the desirability of endless happiness and that happiness  being  derived  from  the endless  
consumption of  products.  Given  the premise  of  unlim-

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                      69

ited wants, the need for endless production is obvious and, by continuation, endless production is a synonym for 
endless, exponential, economic growth.  In the simplest sense, more products produced means that the material 
well-being of society is improved.  For orthodox economists, the improved material well-being of society cannot be 
understated.  For example, it is not uncommon for orthodox economists to argue that given enough growth, social 
maladies such as poverty can be alleviated and, in time, eliminated.  Of course, the orthodox economic perspective 
leaves aside incredibly important considerations such as whether or not new material products are equitably 
distributed.  But, as ortho- dox economists would note, an unequal distribution of products is a separate problem from 
inade- quate production and overt want, so the existence of inequality does not undermine the importance of economic 
growth.

The  issue  of  endless  growth  in  a  finite  biosphere  presents  orthodox  economics  with  interesting conundrums. 
  If  resources  are  finite,  how  is  endless  growth  possible?   Again,  orthodox  economics does  provide  an  
answer  in  form  of  the  advancement  of  knowledge  and  technology  that  allow  for improvements in productivity 
and efficiencies creating opportunities for endless growth.  But what if endless growth then yields waste that pollutes 
the natural environment making human life on the planet ever more difficult to sustain?  The answer to this question is 
more difficult and the failure to answer is more perilous.  Even if knowledge and technological advancement can improve 
productive efficiencies, absent the elimination of waste, exponential economic growth will add waste to the land, sea, 
and air.  Just as lily pads can overrun a pond, with exponential economic growth and its asso- ciated waste, the 
effluent byproducts of industrial production can inundate and overwhelm a finite biosphere.

The mass annihilation of the Plain’s Bison in the 19th century is a grave depiction of the ability of humanity to 
inflict harm upon the natural environment.

70                     ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 





































(Credit: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renewable_resource#/media/File:Bison_skull_pile_edit.jpg)















Endless economic growth necessitates endless production.  At the expense of rich, biodiverse, rain- forest human beings 
burn and clear cut the forest in order expand agricultural capacity.

(Credit:  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tragedy_of_the_commons#/media/File:Lacanja_burn.JPG)

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                      71

It is clear that human economic activity nearly inevitably leads to the creation of waste byproducts, pollution.  Not 
only is the Earth’s biosphere limited in terms of what it can provide in the way of nat- ural resources toward 
productive output, it is also limited in terms of how much waste it is capable of absorbing on land, in the sea, and in 
the air.  For example, the Stockholm Resilience Centre has identified nine planetary boundaries (environmental 
thresholds) that must not be eclipsed if human life is to safely exist.  The nine planetary boundaries are 
stratospheric ozone depletion, biodiversity loss,  chemical  pollution,  climate  change,  ocean  acidification,  
freshwater  consumption,  land  system change, nitrogen and phosphorous flows to the biosphere and oceans, and 
atmospheric aerosol load- ing.  Of these nine boundaries, three in particular, climate change, ocean acidification, and 
stratos- pheric ozone depletion, are of such consequence that if the threshold is surpassed, then the planet’s basic 
ecology will likely be fundamentally destabilized.  In the case of climate change and ocean acid- ification, the two 
issues are caused by human economic activity and are inherently interrelated.  Cli- mate  change  is  caused  by  
carbon  dioxide  emissions  and  ocean  acidification  is  triggered  when  the oceans absorb and process carbon 
dioxide.  Strikingly, at least in the case of climate change, the pro- posed boundary for atmospheric carbon dioxide 
has been surpassed as 350 parts per million (ppm) is the boundary while actual carbon dioxide levels now exceed 400 
ppm.  Clearly, human economic activity, and the associated environmental destruction of the Earth’s biosphere as a 
result of economic growth, does present a powerful challenge to the importance of economic growth.

Given the above-stated considerations, going forward humanity must consider the possibility of ori- enting its economic 
activity within the context of limits.  The direction of orthodox economics, as guided by its definition, is not, 
however, oriented toward accepting limits.  In the face of the abun- dance of scientific evidence pointing toward human 
factors as the cause of a de-stabilizing natural environment, the orthodox definition of economics appears to point 
economic analysis in a direction counter-productive to health and well-being of life on this planet.  As a result, it 
stands to reason that another definition of economics, one less rigid and one-dimensional, may be of use.


1.   ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCE ECONOMICS

Orthodox  economics  is  not  entirely  oblivious  to  environmental  concerns.   Nearly  a  century  ago orthodox 
economic  thinkers such as A. C. Pigou recognized  the potential  for a concept known as externalities.  Discussed in 
chapter 12: Environmental Protection and Negative Externalities, nega- tive externalities represent the idea that 
sometimes economic activities create unaccounted for costs that impact third parties, or those people who are not 
directly involved in the economic activity.    Any failure to properly account for a negative externality means that 
the market system has failed to effi- ciently allocate resources.  For Pigou and orthodox economics, the solution to 
negative externalities is the development of institutional mechanisms that assign penalties to those that create 
negative exter- nalities.

A common orthodox example of an institutional mechanism designed to address negative external- ities  is  the  
government  being  granted  the  regulatory  task  of  environmental  protection.   From  the standpoint  of  orthodox  
economics,  pollution  and  environmental  degradation  represent  a  negative externality, an unaccounted for cost on 
the larger society.  As a regulator, the government can utilize any number of regulatory tools to try and mitigate 
pollution.  For example, one choice preferred by many, but not all, orthodox economists, is the use of taxation as a 
way to increase costs to polluters. Overall, orthodox environmental resource economics places the environment as 
sub-ordinate to the

72                     ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


economy, and argues that marginal analysis should be utilized to measure the economic costs and benefits of 
environmental changes.

As will be later illustrated  in chapter 12: Environmental Protection and Negative Externalities,  by invoking a tax on 
polluters in a market economy, costs to producers rise.  As costs rise the producer will produce less of the product 
the production of which is creating pollution.  Additionally, with less production of the product, the supply of the 
product will decline generating an increase in price of the product.  The outcome is three-fold.  First, with less 
production comes less pollution.  Second, with less production the product now sells at a higher price, with the price 
capturing more of the nega- tive externality and reflecting something closer to the true cost of the product.  Third, 
the tax revenue generated from the tax has the potential to be used to compensate the victims of the negative exter- 
nality.  On the face of it, it appears as though the taxation solution to an externality is providing a final outcome 
that is close to ideal.

Critics of the orthodox economic externality resolution argument have their doubts about the efficacy of the orthodox 
approach.  The following questions represent a small sample of possible concerns. For starters,  it is possible to 
conceive of an economy with a seemingly endless variety of negative externalities, does this mean that all 
externalities will be taxed?  Failure to properly tax negative exter- nalities means that the economy is rife with 
inefficiencies.  Additionally, how large of a government bureaucratic structure would be needed to adequately address 
all externalities?  Might the solution be worse than the cure?  Also, even if all products to be taxed could be 
identified, how can a regulator be certain to precisely calculate the size of the tax in order to correct for the costs 
of the negative exter- nality.

Of course, even if all of the questions above could be sorted out and resolved, there are still basic fundamental 
issues and contradictions, associated with the orthodox definition of economics, which the orthodox argument fails to 
address.  For example, all efforts to address negative environmental externalities call for the reduction of waste and 
some kind of constraint on economic activity and growth.  Any check on growth clearly and obviously runs afoul of the 
basic tenet of orthodox eco- nomics, as is clear in their definition, of endless want of products and the associated 
desirability to try and meet those wants.  Also, any reduction in production will also act to reduce consumption, 
presumably limiting consumers’ abilities to increase their utility by acquiring products.  The primary conclusion being 
that orthodox economics’ own solution for externalities runs counter to the foun- dations of their definition of 
economics.

Some critics of the standard orthodox environmental resource economics arguments, through their application  and  
advocacy  for  ecological  economics,  have  sought  to  re-orient  the  relationship between the economy and the 
environment.  Whereas orthodox economics views the natural envi- ronment as an external factor that may be impacted by 
economic activity, ecological economists place the economy in a sub-ordinate role to the natural environment.  
Ecological economics generally tends to support the notion that the natural environment must be nurtured and protected, 
as, without it, an economy and human life cannot function.  As such ecological economics has a more cautious perspec- 
tive regarding economic activity and how it impacts the natural environment.  As a result, standard orthodox economic 
concepts such as endless economic growth and want fulfillment are of secondary importance to long term sustained living 
made possible through the protection of the natural envi- ronment.  As such, ecological economics operates outside of 
the orthodox definition of economics.
