


3.6  AN  ALTERNATIVE  APPROACH  TO  DEFINING  ECONOMICS



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Describe an alternative definition of economics.

•    Understand the basis for framing an alternative definition of economics.



he preceding presentation centered on deconstructing and then challenging the orthodox defi- nition of economics.  Of 
central concern throughout is the way in which the orthodox defini- tion of economics potentially handcuffs the 
economist into viewing economic activity through
a very narrow and specific lens.  Given the problems associated with the orthodox definition of eco- nomics, a 
concerned student may be apt to ask, what does an alternative definition of economics look like?  The answer to this 
question is that there are many possible alternative definitional variations.

The structure of an alternative definition of economics can take many forms, although the overall essence of 
alternative definitions is frequently similar.  With regard to structure, some alternative def- initions are apt to 
simplify economic activity to its most basic form.  For example, economics can be the study of how human beings must 
work together, and with nature, to produce those things that fulfill the material needs and wants of society.  In other 
instances alternative definitions of economics seek to reduce the definition to the essential characteristics of an 
economy.  For example, economics can be defined as the study of how human beings organize production, distribution, and 
consump- tion.  Still in other instances alternative definitions of economics focus on interdisciplinary facets of the 
structure of economic decision making.  For instance, economics can be defined as the study of how cultural norms, 
social institutions, political structures, and general decision making processes influence human behavior toward 
economic ends.

Importantly, each of the possible definitional structures stipulated above appear to avoid the pitfalls that plague the 
orthodox definition of economics.  First, none of the above alternative definitional possibilities assumes scarcity. 
Rather, each definition is open to the possibility of differing forms of economic organization and a diversity of ways 
to meet societal needs and wants.  Second, none of the above alternative definitional structures make unprovable 
assumptions about individual human behavior  and  motivation.  Rather,  the  social  elements  of  the  organization  
of  economic  activity  are emphasized, opening the door to analyzing how individuals respond to social conditions.  
Third, none of the above alternative definitional structures predicates endless want and the need and desirability for 
endless economic growth. Rather, each is open to the possibility of alternative economic struc- tures that can be 
coordinated to operate within the limits of the natural biosphere.

74                     ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


Going forward, within the context of the alternative perspectives developed within this textbook, and in addition to 
the above definitional structures, the following definition of economics is suggested.

Economics  –  Is  the  study  of  social  provisioning,  in  which  an  understanding  of  the  development  of  
political economies is rooted in social, political, natural, and cultural processes.



CHAPTER 4. DEMAND AND SUPPLY




INTRODUCTION  TO  DEMAND  AND  SUPPLY





























Figure 1. Farmer’s Market. Organic vegetables and fruits that are grown and sold within a specific geographical region 
should, in theory, cost less than conventional produce because the transportation costs are less. That is not, however, 
usually the case. (Credit: modification of work by Natalie Maynor/Flickr Creative Commons)


WHY CAN WE NOT GET ENOUGH OF ORGANIC?

Organic food is increasingly popular, not just in the United States, but worldwide. At one time, consumers had to go to 
specialty stores or farmer’s markets to find organic produce. Now it is available in most grocery stores. In short, 
organic is part of the mainstream.
Ever wonder why organic food costs more than conventional food? Why, say, does an organic Fuji apple cost $1.99 a 
pound, while its conventional counterpart costs $1.49 a pound? The same price relationship is true for just about every 
organic product on the market. If many organic foods are locally grown, would they not take less time to get to market 
and there- fore be cheaper? What are the forces that keep those prices from coming down? Turns out those forces have a 
lot to do with this chapter’s topic: demand and supply.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                      77
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES


Introduction to Demand and Supply
In this chapter, you will learn about:

•    Demand, Supply, and Equilibrium in Markets for Goods and Services

•    Shifts in Demand and Supply for Goods and Services

•    Changes in Equilibrium Price and Quantity: The Four-Step Process

•    Price Ceilings and Price Floors



n  auction  bidder  pays  thousands  of  dollars  for  a  dress  Whitney  Houston  wore.  A  collector spends a small 
fortune for a few drawings by John Lennon. People usually react to purchases like these in two ways: their jaw drops 
because they think these are high prices to pay for such
goods or they think these are rare, desirable items and the amount paid seems right.

Visit this website to read a list of bizarre items that have been purchased for their ties to celebrities. These 
examples repre- sent an interesting facet of demand and supply.












When economists talk about prices, they are less interested in making judgments than in gaining a practical 
understanding of what determines prices and why prices change. Consider a price most of us contend with weekly: that of 
a gallon of gas. Why was the average price of gasoline in the United States $3.71 per gallon in June 2014? Why did the 
price for gasoline fall sharply to $2.07 per gallon by January 2015? To explain these price movements, economists focus 
on the determinants of what gasoline buyers are willing to pay and what gasoline sellers are willing to accept.

As it turns out, the price of gasoline in June of any given year is nearly always higher than the price in January of 
that same year; over recent decades, gasoline prices in midsummer have averaged about 10 cents per gallon more than 
their midwinter low. The likely reason is that people drive more in the summer, and are also willing to pay more for 
gas, but that does not explain how steeply gas prices fell. Other factors were at work during those six months, such as 
increases in supply and decreases in the demand for crude oil.

This chapter introduces the economic model of demand and supply—one of the most powerful mod- els in all of economics. 
The discussion here begins by examining how demand and supply determine

78                     ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


the price and the quantity sold in markets for goods and services, and how changes in demand and supply lead to changes 
in prices and quantities.
