


4.3  CHANGES  IN  EQUILIBRIUM  PRICE  AND  QUANTITY:  THE FOUR-STEP  PROCESS



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Identify equilibrium price and quantity through the four-step process

•    Graph equilibrium price and quantity

•    Contrast shifts of demand or supply and movements along a demand or supply curve

•    Graph demand and supply curves, including equilibrium price and quantity, based on real-world examples



et’s begin this discussion with a single economic event. It might be an event that affects demand, like a change in 
income, population, tastes, prices of substitutes or complements, or expectations  about future prices. It might be an 
event that affects supply, like a change in natural conditions,  input prices, or technology, or government policies 
that affect production. How does this economic
event affect equilibrium price and quantity? We will analyze this question using a four-step process.

Step 1. Draw a demand and supply model before the economic change took place. To establish the model requires four 
standard pieces of information: The law of demand, which tells us the slope of the demand curve; the law of supply, 
which gives us the slope of the supply curve; the shift variables for demand; and the shift variables for supply. From 
this model, find the initial equilibrium values for price and quantity.

Step  2.  Decide  whether  the  economic  change  being  analyzed  affects  demand  or  supply.  In  other words, does 
the event refer to something in the list of demand factors or supply factors?

Step 3. Decide whether the effect on demand or supply causes the curve to shift to the right or to the left, and sketch 
the new demand or supply curve on the diagram. In other words, does the event increase or decrease the amount consumers 
want to buy or producers want to sell?

Step 4. Identify the new equilibrium and then compare the original equilibrium price and quantity to the new 
equilibrium price and quantity.

Let’s consider one example that involves a shift in supply and one that involves a shift in demand. Then we will 
consider an example where both supply and demand shift.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   105
GOOD WEATHER FOR SALMON FISHING
In the summer of 2000, weather conditions were excellent for commercial salmon fishing off the Cal- ifornia coast. 
Heavy rains meant higher than normal levels of water in the rivers, which helps the salmon to breed. Slightly cooler 
ocean temperatures stimulated the growth of plankton, the micro- scopic organisms at the bottom of the ocean food 
chain, providing everything in the ocean with a hearty food supply. The ocean stayed calm during fishing season, so 
commercial fishing operations did not lose many days to bad weather. How did these climate conditions affect the 
quantity and price of salmon? Figure 1 illustrates the four-step approach, which is explained below, to work through 
this problem. Table 7 provides the information to work the problem as well.























Figure 1. Good Weather for Salmon Fishing: The Four-Step Process. Unusually good weather leads to changes in the price 
and quantity of salmon.

Price per Pound    Quantity Supplied in 1999    Quantity Supplied in 2000    Quantity Demanded
$2.00                         80                                                  400                                   
            840
$2.25                         120                                               480                                     
          680
$2.50                         160                                               550                                     
          550
$2.75                         200                                               600                                     
          450
$3.00                         230                                               640                                     
          350
$3.25                         250                                               670                                     
          250
$3.50                         270                                               700                                     
          200
Table 7. Salmon Fishing

Step 1. Draw a demand and supply model to illustrate the market for salmon in the year before the good weather 
conditions began. The demand curve D0 and the supply curve S0 show that the original

106                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


equilibrium price is $3.25 per pound and the original equilibrium quantity is 250,000 fish. (This price per pound is 
what commercial buyers pay at the fishing docks; what consumers pay at the grocery is higher.)

Step 2. Did the economic event affect supply or demand? Good weather is an example of a natural condition that affects 
supply.

Step 3. Was the effect on supply an increase or a decrease? Good weather is a change in natural con- ditions that 
increases the quantity supplied at any given price. The supply curve shifts to the right, moving from the original 
supply curve S0 to the new supply curve S1, which is shown in both the table and the figure.

Step 4. Compare the new equilibrium price and quantity to the original equilibrium. At the new equi- librium  E1, the 
equilibrium  price  falls  from $3.25  to $2.50,  but  the equilibrium  quantity  increases from  250,000  to  550,000  
salmon.  Notice  that  the  equilibrium  quantity  demanded  increased,  even though the demand curve did not move.

In short, good weather conditions increased supply of the California commercial salmon. The result was a higher 
equilibrium quantity of salmon bought and sold in the market at a lower price.

NEWSPAPERS AND THE INTERNET
According to the Pew Researcft Center for People and tfte Press, more and more people, especially younger people, are 
getting their news from online and digital sources. The majority of U.S. adults now  own  smartphones  or  tablets,  
and  most  of  those  Americans  say  they  use  them  in  part  to  get the news. From 2004 to 2012, the share of 
Americans who reported getting their news from digital sources increased from 24% to 39%. How has this affected 
consumption of print news media, and radio  and  television  news?  Figure  2  and  the  text  below  illustrates  
using  the  four-step  analysis  to answer this question.

Step 1. Develop a demand and supply model to think about what the market looked like before the event. The demand curve 
D0 and the supply curve S0 show the original relationships. In this case, the analysis is performed without specific 
numbers on the price and quantity axis.

Step 2. Did the change described affect supply or demand? A change in tastes, from traditional news sources (print, 
radio, and television) to digital sources, caused a change in demand for the former.

Step 3. Was the effect on demand positive or negative? A shift to digital news sources will tend to mean a lower 
quantity demanded of traditional news sources at every given price, causing the demand curve for print and other 
traditional news sources to shift to the left, from D0 to D1.

Step 4. Compare the new equilibrium price and quantity to the original equilibrium price. The new equilibrium (E1) 
occurs at a lower quantity and a lower price than the original equilibrium (E0).

The decline in print news reading predates 2004. Print newspaper circulation peaked in 1973 and has declined since then 
due to competition from television and radio news. In 1991, 55% of Americans indicated they got their news from print 
sources, while only 29% did so in 2012. Radio news has fol- lowed a similar path in recent decades, with the share of 
Americans getting their news from radio

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   107
























Figure 2. The Print News Market: A Four-Step Analysis. A change in tastes from print news sources to digital sources 
results in a left- ward shift in demand for the former. The result is a decrease in both equilibrium price and 
quantity.

declining from 54% in 1991 to 33% in 2012. Television news has held its own over the last 15 years, with a market share 
staying in the mid to upper fifties. What does this suggest for the future, given that two-thirds of Americans under 30 
years old say they do not get their news from television at all?

THE INTERCONNECTIONS AND SPEED OF ADJUSTMENT IN REAL MARKETS

In the real world, many factors that affect demand and supply can change all at once. For example, the demand for cars 
might increase because of rising incomes and population, and it might decrease because of rising gasoline prices (a 
complementary good). Likewise, the supply of cars might increase because of innovative new technologies that reduce the 
cost of car production, and it might decrease as a result of new government regulations requiring the installation of 
costly pollution-control tech- nology.

Moreover, rising incomes and population or changes in gasoline prices will affect many markets, not just cars. How can 
an economist sort out all these interconnected events? The answer lies in the ceteris paribus assumption. Look at how 
each economic event affects each market, one event at a time, hold- ing all else constant. Then combine the analyses to 
see the net effect.

A COMBINED EXAMPLE

The  U.S.  Postal  Service  is  facing  difficult  challenges.  Compensation  for  postal  workers  tends  to increase  
most  years  due  to  cost-of-living  increases.  At  the  same  time,  more  and  more  people  are using email, text, 
and other digital message forms such as Facebook and Twitter to communicate with

108                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


friends and others. What does this suggest about the continued viability of the Postal Service? Figure 3 and the text 
below illustrates using the four-step analysis to answer this question.






















Figure 3. Higher Compensation for Postal Workers: A Four-Step Analysis. (a) Higher labor compensation causes a leftward 
shift in the supply curve, a decrease in the equilibrium quantity, and an increase in the equilibrium price. (b) A 
change in tastes away from Postal Services causes a leftward shift in the demand curve, a decrease in the equilibrium 
quantity, and a decrease in the equilibrium price.

Since this problem involves two disturbances, we need two four-step analyses, the first to analyze the effects of 
higher compensation for postal workers, the second to analyze the effects of many people switching from “snailmail” to 
email and other digital messages.

Figure 3 (a) shows the shift in supply discussed in the following steps.

Step 1. Draw a demand and supply model to illustrate what the market for the U.S. Postal Service looked like before 
this scenario starts. The demand curve D0 and the supply curve S0 show the original relationships.

Step 2. Did the change described affect supply or demand? Labor compensation is a cost of produc- tion. A change in 
production costs caused a change in supply for the Postal Service.

Step 3. Was the effect on supply positive or negative? Higher labor compensation leads to a lower quantity supplied of 
postal services at every given price, causing the supply curve for postal services to shift to the left, from S0 to S1.

Step 4. Compare the new equilibrium price and quantity to the original equilibrium price. The new equilibrium (E1) 
occurs at a lower quantity and a higher price than the original equilibrium (E0).

Figure 3 (b) shows the shift in demand discussed in the following steps.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   109

Step 1. Draw a demand and supply model to illustrate what the market for U.S. Postal Services looked like before this 
scenario starts. The demand curve D0 and the supply curve S0 show the original rela- tionships. Note that this diagram 
is independent from the diagram in panel (a).

Step 2. Did the change described affect supply or demand? A change in tastes away from snailmail toward digital 
messages will cause a change in demand for the Postal Service.

Step 3. Was the effect on supply positive or negative? Higher labor compensation leads to a lower quantity supplied of 
postal services at every given price, causing the supply curve for postal services to shift to the left, from D0 to D1.

Step 4. Compare the new equilibrium price and quantity to the original equilibrium price. The new equilibrium (E2) 
occurs at a lower quantity and a lower price than the original equilibrium (E0).

The final step in a scenario where both supply and demand shift is to combine the two individual analyses to determine 
what happens to the equilibrium quantity and price. Graphically, we superim- pose the previous two diagrams one on top 
of the other, as in Figure 4.
























Figure  4.  Combined  Effect  of  Decreased  Demand  and  Decreased Supply.  Supply  and  demand  shifts  cause  
changes  in  equilibrium price and quantity.

Following are the results:

Effect on Quantity: The effect of higher labor compensation on Postal Services because it raises the cost of production 
is to decrease the equilibrium quantity. The effect of a change in tastes away from snailmail is to decrease the 
equilibrium quantity. Since both shifts are to the left, the overall impact is

110                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 

a decrease in the equilibrium quantity of Postal Services (Q3). This is easy to see graphically, since Q3 is to the 
left of Q0.

Effect on Price: The overall effect on price is more complicated. The effect of higher labor compen- sation on Postal 
Services, because it raises the cost of production, is to increase the equilibrium price. The effect of a change in 
tastes away from snailmail is to decrease the equilibrium price. Since the two effects are in opposite directions, 
unless we know the magnitudes of the two effects, the overall effect is unclear. This is not unusual. When both curves 
shift, typically we can determine the overall effect on price or on quantity, but not on both. In this case, we 
determined the overall effect on the equilib- rium quantity, but not on the equilibrium price. In other cases, it might 
be the opposite.

The next Clear It Up feature focuses on the difference between shifts of supply or demand and move- ments along a 
curve.


WHAT IS THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN SHIFTS OF DEMAND OR SUPPLY VERSUS MOVEMENTS ALONG A DEMAND OR SUPPLY CURVE?

One common mistake in applying the demand and supply framework is to confuse the shift of a demand or a supply curve 
with  movement  along  a  demand  or  supply  curve.  As  an  example,  consider  a  problem  that  asks  whether  a  
drought  will increase or decrease the equilibrium quantity and equilibrium price of wheat. Lee, a student in an 
introductory economics class, might reason:
“Well, it is clear that a drought reduces supply, so I will shift back the supply curve, as in the shift from the 
original supply curve S0 to S1 shown on the diagram (called Shift 1). So the equilibrium moves from E0 to E1, the 
equilibrium quantity is lower and the equilibrium price is higher. Then, a higher price makes farmers more likely to 
supply the good, so the supply curve shifts right, as shown by the shift from S1 to S2, on the diagram (shown as Shift 
2), so that the equilibrium now moves from E1 to E2. The higher price, however, also reduces demand and so causes 
demand to shift back, like the shift from the
original demand curve, D0 to D1 on the diagram (labeled Shift 3), and the equilibrium moves from E2 to E3.”




















Figure 5. Shifts of Demand or Supply versus Movements along a Demand or Supply Curve. A shift in one curve never causes 
a shift in the other curve. Rather, a shift in one curve causes a movement along the second curve.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   111



At about this point, Lee suspects that this answer is headed down the wrong path. Think about what might be wrong with 
Lee’s logic, and then read the answer that follows.
Answer: Lee’s first step is correct: that is, a drought shifts back the supply curve of wheat and leads to a prediction 
of a lower equilibrium quantity and a higher equilibrium price. This corresponds to a movement along the original 
demand curve (D0), from E0 to E1. The rest of Lee’s argument is wrong, because it mixes up shifts in supply with 
quantity supplied, and shifts in demand with quantity demanded. A higher or lower price never shifts the supply curve, 
as suggested by the shift in supply from S1 to S2. Instead, a price change leads to a movement along a given supply 
curve. Similarly, a higher or lower price never shifts a demand curve, as suggested in the shift from D0  to D1. 
Instead, a price change leads to a movement along a given demand curve. Remember, a change in the price of a good never 
causes the demand or supply curve for that good to shift.
Think carefully about the timeline of events: What happens first, what happens next? What is cause, what is effect? If 
you keep the order right, you are more likely to get the analysis correct.

In the four-step analysis of how economic events affect equilibrium price and quantity, the movement from  the  old  to 
 the  new  equilibrium  seems  immediate.  As  a  practical  matter,  however,  prices  and quantities  often  do  not  
zoom  straight  to  equilibrium.  More  realistically,  when  an  economic  event causes demand or supply to shift, 
prices and quantities set off in the general direction of equilibrium. Indeed, even as they are moving toward one new 
equilibrium, prices are often then pushed by another change in demand or supply toward another equilibrium.

KEY CONCEPTS AND SUMMARY

When using the supply and demand framework to think about how an event will affect the equilib- rium price and 
quantity, proceed through four steps: (1) sketch a supply and demand diagram to think about what the market looked like 
before the event; (2) decide whether the event will affect supply or demand; (3) decide whether the effect on supply or 
demand is negative or positive, and draw the appropriate shifted supply or demand curve; (4) compare the new 
equilibrium price and quantity to the original ones.

SELF-CHECK QUESTIONS



1.    Let’s think about the market for air travel. From August 2014 to January 2015, the price of jet fuel decreased 
roughly 47%. Using the four-step analysis, how do you think this fuel price decrease affected the  equilibrium price 
and quantity of air travel?
2.    A tariff is a tax on imported goods. Suppose the U.S. government cuts the tariff on imported flat screen 
televisions. Using the four-step analysis, how do you think the tariff reduction will affect the equilibrium price and 
quantity of flat screen TVs?



REVIEW QUESTIONS



1.    How does one analyze a market where both demand and supply shift?
2.    What causes a movement along the demand curve? What causes a movement along the supply curve?

112                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 



CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS



1.    Use the four-step process to analyze the impact of the advent of the iPod (or other portable digital music 
players) on the equilibrium price and quantity of the Sony Walkman (or other portable audio cassette players).
2.    Use the four-step process to analyze the impact of a reduction in tariffs on imports of iPods on the equilibrium 
price and quantity of Sony Walkman-type products.
3.    Suppose both of these events took place at the same time. Combine your analyses of the impacts of the iPod and 
the tariff reduction to determine the likely impact on the equilibrium price and quantity of Sony Walkman-type 
products. Show your answer graphically.



PROBLEMS



1.    Demand and supply in the market for cheddar cheese is illustrated in Table 8. Graph the data and find the 
equilibrium. Next, create a table showing the change in quantity demanded or quantity supplied, and a graph of the new 
equilibrium, in each of the following situations:

a.    The price of milk, a key input for cheese production, rises, so that the supply decreases by 80 pounds at every 
price.
b.    A new study says that eating cheese is good for your health, so that demand increases by 20% at every price.

Price per Pound                                        Qd                 Qs

$3.00                                                             750                540

$3.20                                                             700                600
$3.40                                                             650                650

$3.60                                                             620                700

$3.80                                                             600                720

$4.00                                                             590                730
Table 8. Demand and supply in the market for cheddar cheese

2.    Supply and demand for movie tickets in a city are shown in Table 9. Graph demand and supply and identify the 
equilibrium. Then calculate in a table and graph the effect of the following two changes.

a.    Three new nightclubs open. They offer decent bands and have no cover charge, but make their money by selling food 
and drink. As a result, demand for movie tickets falls by six units at every price.
b.    The city eliminates a tax that it had been placing on all local entertainment businesses. The result is that the 
quantity supplied of movies at any given price increases by 10%.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   113





Price per Pound                         Qd          Qs

$5.00                                              26            16

$6.00                                              24            18

$7.00                                              22            20

$8.00                                              21            21

$9.00                                              20            22
Table 9. Demand and supply for movie tickets



REFERENCES

Pew  Research  Center.  “Pew  Research:  Center  for  the  People  &  the  Press.”  http://www.people- press.org/.

SOLUTIONS


Answers to Self-Cfteck Questions

1.    Step 1. Draw the graph with the initial supply and demand curves. Label the initial equilibrium price and 
quantity.
Step  2.  Did  the  economic  event  affect  supply  or  demand?  Jet  fuel  is  a  cost  of  producing  air  travel,  
so  an increase in jet fuel price affects supply.
Step 3. An increase in the price of jet fuel caused a decrease in the cost of air travel. We show this as a down- ward 
or rightward shift in supply.
Step 4. A rightward shift in supply causes a movement down the demand curve, lowering the equilibrium price of air 
travel and increasing the equilibrium quantity.
2.    Step 1. Draw the graph with the initial supply and demand curves. Label the initial equilibrium price and 
quantity.
Step 2. Did the economic event affect supply or demand? A tariff is treated like a cost of production, so this affects 
supply.
Step 3. A tariff reduction is equivalent to a decrease in the cost of production, which we can show as a right- ward 
(or downward) shift in supply.
Step 4. A rightward shift in supply causes a movement down the demand curve, lowering the equilibrium price and raising 
the equilibrium quantity.
