


4.4  PRICE  CEILINGS  AND  PRICE  FLOORS



LEARNING OBJECTIVES


By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Explain price controls, price ceilings, and price floors
•    Analyze demand and supply as a social adjustment mechanism



ontroversy sometimes surrounds the prices and quantities established by demand and supply, especially for products that 
are considered necessities. In some cases, discontent over prices turns into public pressure on politicians, who may 
then pass legislation to prevent a certain
price from climbing “too high” or falling “too low.”

The demand and supply model shows how people and firms will react to the incentives provided by these laws to control 
prices, in ways that will often lead to undesirable consequences. Alternative pol- icy tools can often achieve the 
desired goals of price control laws, while avoiding at least some of their costs and tradeoffs.

PRICE CEILINGS
Laws that government enacts to regulate prices are called Price controls. Price controls come in two flavors. A price 
ceiling keeps a price from rising above a certain level (the “ceiling”), while a price floor keeps a price from falling 
below a certain level (the “floor”). This section uses the demand and supply framework to analyze price ceilings. The 
next section discusses price floors.

In many markets for goods and services, demanders outnumber suppliers. Consumers, who are also potential voters, 
sometimes unite behind a political proposal to hold down a certain price. In some cities, such as Albany, renters have 
pressed political leaders to pass rent control laws, a price ceiling that usually works by stating that rents can be 
raised by only a certain maximum percentage each year.

Rent  control  becomes  a  politically  hot  topic  when  rents  begin  to  rise  rapidly.  Everyone  needs  an 
affordable place to live. Perhaps a change in tastes makes a certain suburb or town a more popular place to live. 
Perhaps locally-based businesses expand, bringing higher incomes and more people into the area. Changes of this sort 
can cause a change in the demand for rental housing, as Figure 1 illus- trates. The original equilibrium (E0) lies at 
the intersection of supply curve S0 and demand curve D0, corresponding to an equilibrium price of $500 and an 
equilibrium quantity of 15,000 units of rental housing. The effect of greater income or a change in tastes is to shift 
the demand curve for rental

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   115
housing to the right, as shown by the data in Table 10 and the shift from D0 to D1 on the graph. In this market, at the 
new equilibrium E1, the price of a rental unit would rise to $600 and the equilibrium quantity would increase to 17,000 
units.
















Figure  1.  A  Price  Ceiling  Example—Rent  Control.  The  original intersection  of  demand  and  supply  occurs  at  
E0.  If  demand  shifts from D0  to D1, the new equilibrium would be at E1—unless a price ceiling prevents the price 
from rising. If the price is not permitted to rise, the quantity supplied remains at 15,000. However, after the change 
in demand, the quantity demanded rises to 19,000, resulting in a shortage.

Price    Original Quantity Supplied    Original Quantity Demanded    New Quantity Demanded
$400    12,000                                             18,000                                                 
23,000
$500    15,000                                             15,000                                                 
19,000
$600    17,000                                             13,000                                                 
17,000
$700    19,000                                             11,000                                                 
15,000
$800    20,000                                             10,000                                                 
14,000
Table 10. Rent Control

Suppose that a rent control law is passed to keep the price at the original equilibrium of $500 for a typ- ical 
apartment. In Figure 1, the horizontal line at the price of $500 shows the legally fixed maximum price set by the rent 
control law. However, the underlying forces that shifted the demand curve to the right are still there. At that price 
($500), the quantity supplied remains at the same 15,000 rental units, but the quantity demanded is 19,000 rental 
units. In other words, the quantity demanded exceeds the quantity supplied, so there is a shortage of rental housing. 
One of the ironies of price ceilings is that while the price ceiling was intended to help renters, there are actually 
fewer apartments rented out under the price ceiling (15,000 rental units) than would be the case at the market rent of 
$600 (17,000 rental units).

Price  ceilings  do  not  simply  benefit  renters  at  the  expense  of  landlords.  Rather,  some  renters  (or

116                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 

potential  renters)  lose  their  housing  as  landlords  convert  apartments  to  co-ops  and  condos.  Even when the 
housing remains in the rental market, landlords tend to spend less on maintenance and on essentials like heating, 
cooling, hot water, and lighting. The first rule of economics is you do not get something for nothing—everything has an 
opportunity cost. So if renters get “cheaper” housing than the market requires, they tend to also end up with lower 
quality housing.

Price ceilings have been proposed for other products. For example, price ceilings to limit what pro- ducers can charge 
have been proposed in recent years for prescription drugs, doctor and hospital fees, the charges made by some automatic 
teller bank machines, and auto insurance rates. Price ceilings are enacted in an attempt to keep prices low for those 
who demand the product. But when the market price is not allowed to rise to the equilibrium level, quantity demanded 
exceeds quantity supplied, and thus a shortage occurs. Those who manage to purchase the product at the lower price 
given by the price ceiling will benefit, but sellers of the product will suffer, along with those who are not able to 
purchase the product at all. Quality is also likely to deteriorate.

PRICE FLOORS
A price floor is the lowest legal price that can be paid in markets for goods and services, labor, or financial 
capital. Perhaps the best-known example of a price floor is the minimum wage, which is based on the normative view that 
someone working full time ought to be able to afford a basic stan- dard of living. The federal minimum wage at the end 
of 2014 was $7.25 per hour, which yields an income for a single person slightly higher than the poverty line. As the 
cost of living rises over time, the Congress periodically raises the federal minimum wage.

Price floors are sometimes called “price supports,” because they support a price by preventing it from falling below a 
certain level. Around the world, many countries have passed laws to create agricultural price supports. Farm prices and 
thus farm incomes fluctuate, sometimes widely. So even if, on aver- age, farm incomes are adequate, some years they can 
be quite low. The purpose of price supports is to prevent these swings.

The most common way price supports work is that the government enters the market and buys up the product, adding to 
demand to keep prices higher than they otherwise would be. According to the Common Agricultural Policy reform passed in 
2013, the European Union (EU) will spend about 60 billion euros per year, or 67 billion dollars per year, or roughly 
38% of the EU budget, on price sup- ports for Europe’s farmers from 2014 to 2020.

Figure 2 illustrates the effects of a government program that assures a price above the equilibrium by focusing on the 
market for wheat in Europe. In the absence of government intervention, the price would  adjust  so  that  the  quantity 
 supplied  would  equal  the  quantity  demanded  at  the  equilibrium point E0, with price P0 and quantity Q0. 
However, policies to keep prices high for farmers keeps the price above what would have been the market equilibrium 
level—the price Pf shown by the dashed horizontal line in the diagram. The result is a quantity supplied in excess of 
the quantity demanded (Qd). When quantity supplied exceeds quantity demanded, a surplus exists.

The high-income areas of the world, including the United States, Europe, and Japan, are estimated to spend roughly $1 
billion per day in supporting their farmers. If the government is willing to purchase the excess supply (or to provide 
payments for others to purchase it), then farmers will benefit from the price floor, but taxpayers and consumers of 
food will pay the costs. Numerous proposals have been

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   117
offered for reducing farm subsidies. In many countries, however, political support for subsidies for farmers remains 
strong. Either because this is viewed by the population as supporting the traditional rural way of life or because of 
the lobbying power of the agro-business industry.
For more detail on the effects price ceilings and floors have on demand and supply, see the following Clear It Up 
feature.





















Figure  2.  European  Wheat  Prices:  A  Price  Floor  Example.  The intersection of demand (D) and supply (S) would be 
at the equilib- rium point E0. However, a price floor set at Pf holds the price above E0 and prevents it from falling. 
The result of the price floor is that the quantity supplied Qs exceeds the quantity demanded Qd. There is excess 
supply, also called a surplus.


DO PRICE CEILINGS AND FLOORS CHANGE DEMAND OR SUPPLY?

Neither price ceilings nor price floors cause demand or supply to change. They simply set a price that limits what can 
be legally charged in the market. Remember, changes in price do not cause demand or supply to change. Price ceilings 
and price floors can cause a different choice of quantity demanded along a demand curve, but they do not move the 
demand curve. Price controls can cause a different choice of quantity supplied along a supply curve, but they do not 
shift the supply curve.


KEY CONCEPTS AND SUMMARY
Price ceilings prevent a price from rising above a certain level. When a price ceiling is set below the equilibrium 
price, quantity demanded will exceed quantity supplied, and excess demand or shortages will result. Price floors 
prevent a price from falling below a certain level. When a price floor is set

118                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 

above the equilibrium price, quantity supplied will exceed quantity demanded, and excess supply or surpluses will 
result. Price floors and price ceilings often lead to unintended consequences.

SELF-CHECK QUESTIONS


1.    What is the effect of a price ceiling on the quantity demanded of the product? What is the effect of a price 
ceiling on the quantity supplied? Why exactly does a price ceiling cause a shortage?
2.    Does a price ceiling change the equilibrium price?
3.    What would be the impact of imposing a price floor below the equilibrium price?



REVIEW QUESTIONS


1.    Does a price ceiling attempt to make a price higher or lower?
2.    How does a price ceiling set below the equilibrium level affect quantity demanded and quantity supplied?
3.    Does a price floor attempt to make a price higher or lower?
4.    How does a price floor set above the equilibrium level affect quantity demanded and quantity supplied?



CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS


1.    Most government policy decisions have winners and losers. What are the effects of raising the minimum wage? It is 
more complex than simply producers lose and workers gain. Who are the winners and who are the losers, and what exactly 
do they win and lose? To what extent does the policy change achieve its goals?
2.    Agricultural price supports result in governments holding large inventories of agricultural products. Why do you 
think the government cannot simply give the products away to poor people?
3.    Can you propose a policy that would induce the market to supply more rental housing units?



PROBLEMS


A low-income country decides to set a price ceiling on bread so it can make sure that bread is affordable to the poor. 
The conditions of demand and supply are given in Table 11. What are the equilibrium price and equilibrium quantity 
before the price ceiling? What will the excess demand or the shortage (that is, quantity demanded minus quantity sup- 
plied) be if the price ceiling is set at $2.40? At $2.00? At $3.60?

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   119




Price                            Qd                                Qs
$1.60                            9,000                            5,000
$2.00                            8,500                            5,500
$2.40                            8,000                            6,400
$2.80                            7,500                             7,500
$3.20                            7,000                            9,000
$3.60                            6,500                            11,000
$4.00                            6,000                            15,000
Table 11. Demand and Supply of Bread in Low-Income Country





price ceiling a legal maximum price

GLOSSARY
price control government laws to regulate prices instead of letting market forces determine prices
price floor a legal minimum price
total surplus see social surplus

SOLUTIONS


Answers to Self-Cfteck Questions

1.    A price ceiling (which is below the equilibrium price) will cause the quantity demanded to rise and the quantity 
supplied to fall. This is why a price ceiling creates a shortage.
2.    A price ceiling is just a legal restriction. Equilibrium is an economic condition. People may or may not obey the 
price ceiling, so the actual price may be at or above the price ceiling, but the price ceiling does not change the 
equilibrium price.
3.    A price ceiling is a legal maximum price, but a price floor is a legal minimum price and, consequently, it would 
leave room for the price to rise to its equilibrium level. In other words, a price floor below equilibrium will not be 
binding and will have no effect.
