


7.4  INTERTEMPORAL  CHOICES  IN  FINANCIAL  CAPITAL  MARKETS



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Evaluate the reasons for making intertemporal choices

•    Interpret an intertemporal budget constraint

•    Analyze why people in America tend to save such a small percentage of their income



ates of saving in America have never been especially high, but they seem to have dipped even lower in recent years, as 
the data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis in Figure 1 show. A decision  about  how  much  to  save  can  be  
represented  using  an  intertemporal budget con- straint. Household decisions about the quantity of financial savings 
show the same underlying pat-
tern of logic as the consumption choice decision and the labor-leisure decision.


















Figure 1. Personal Savings as a Percentage of Personal Income. Personal savings were about 7 to 11% of personal income 
for most of the years from the late 1950s up to the early 1990s. Since then, the rate of personal savings has fallen 
substantially, although it seems to have bounced back a bit since 2008. (Source: 
http://www.bea.gov/newsreleases/national/pi/pinewsrelease.htm)

The discussion of financial saving here will not focus on the specific financial investment choices, like bank 
accounts, stocks, bonds, mutual funds, or owning a house or gold coins. The characteristics of

230                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


these specific financial investments, along with the risks and tradeoffs they pose, are detailed in the Labor and 
Financial Markets chapter. Here, the focus is saving in total—that is, on how a household determines how much to 
consume in the present and how much to save, given the expected rate of return (or interest rate), and how the quantity 
of saving alters when the rate of return changes.

USING MARGINAL UTILITY TO MAKE INTERTEMPORAL CHOICES

Savings behavior varies considerably across households. One factor is that households with higher incomes tend to save 
a larger percentage of their income. This pattern makes intuitive sense; a well- to-do family has the flexibility in 
its budget to save 20–25% of income, while a poor family struggling to keep food on the table will find it harder to 
put money aside.

Another factor that causes personal saving to vary is personal preferences. Some people may prefer to consume more now, 
and let the future look after itself. Others may wish to enjoy a lavish retire- ment, complete with expensive 
vacations, or to pile up money that they can pass along to their grand- children. There are savers and spendthrifts 
among the young, middle-aged, and old, and among those with high, middle, and low income levels.

Consider this example: Yelberton is a young man starting off at his first job. He thinks of the “present” as his 
working life and the “future” as after retirement. Yelberton’s plan is to save money from ages 30 to 60, retire at age 
60, and then live off his retirement money from ages 60 to 85. On average, there- fore, he will be saving for 30 years. 
If the rate of return that he can receive is 6% per year, then $1 saved in the present would build up to $5.74 after 30 
years (using the formula for compound interest,
$1(1 + 0.06)30 = $5.74). Say that Yelberton will earn $1,000,000 over the 30 years from age 30 to age
60 (this amount is approximately an annual salary of $33,333 multiplied by 30 years). The question for Yelberton is how 
much of those lifetime earnings to consume during his working life, and how much to put aside until after retirement. 
This example is obviously built on simplifying assumptions, but it does convey the basic life-cycle choice of saving 
during working life for future consumption after retirement.
Figure 2 and Table 16 show Yelberton’s intertemporal budget constraint. Yelberton’s choice involves comparing the 
utility of present consumption during his working life and future consumption after retirement. The rate of return that 
determines the slope of the intertemporal budget line between pre- sent consumption and future consumption in this 
example is the annual interest rate that he would earn on his savings, compounded over the 30 years of his working 
life. (For simplicity, we are assum- ing that any savings from current income will compound for 30 years.) Thus, in the 
lower budget con- straint line on the figure, future consumption grows by increments of $574,000, because each time
$100,000 is saved in the present, it compounds to $574,000 after 30 years at a 6% interest rate. If some of the numbers 
on the future consumption axis look bizarrely large, remember that this occurs because of the power of compound 
interest over substantial periods of time, and because the figure is grouping together all of Yelberton’s saving for 
retirement over his lifetime.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   231































Figure 2. Yelberton’s Choice: The Intertemporal Budget Set. Yelber- ton  will  make  a  choice  between  present  and  
future  consumption. With an annual rate of return of 6%, he decides that his utility will be highest at point B, which 
represents a choice of $800,000 in pre- sent consumption and $1,148,000 in future consumption. When the annual  rate  
of  return  rises  to  9%,  the  intertemporal  budget  con- straint  pivots  up.  Yelberton  could  choose  to  take  
the  gains  from this  higher  rate  of  return  in  several  forms:  more  present  saving and much higher future 
consumption ( J), the same present saving and higher future consumption (K), more present consumption and more future 
consumption (L), or more present consumption and the same future consumption (M).

232                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 



Present Consumption
Present Savings
Future Consumption (6% annual return)
Future Consumption (9% annual return)
$1,000,000                        0                               0                                                     
                       0
$900,000                           $100,000                $574,000                                                     
        $1,327,000
$800,000                           $200,000                $1,148,000                                                   
       $2,654,000
$700,000                           $300,000                $1,722,000                                                   
       $3,981,000
$600,000                           $400,000                $2,296,000                                                   
       $5,308,000
$400,000                           $600,000                $3,444,000                                                   
       $7,962,000
$200,000                           $800,000                $4,592,000                                                   
       $10,616,000
0                                          $1,000,000            $5,740,000                                             
             $13,270,000
Table 16. Yelburton’s Intertemporal Budget Constraint

Yelberton will compare the different choices along the budget constraint and choose the one that provides him with the 
highest utility. For example, he will compare the utility he would receive from a choice like point A, with consumption 
of $1 million in the present, zero savings, and zero future consumption; point B, with present consumption of $800,000, 
savings of $200,000, and future con- sumption of $1,148,000; point C, with present consumption of $600,000, savings of 
$400,000, and future consumption of $2,296,000; or even choice D, with present consumption of zero, savings of
$1,000,000,  and  future  consumption  of  $5,740,000.  Yelberton  will  also  ask  himself  questions  like these: 
“Would I prefer to consume a little less in the present, save more, and have more future con- sumption?” or “Would I 
prefer to consume a little more in the present, save less, and have less future consumption?” By considering marginal 
changes toward more or less consumption, he can seek out the choice that will provide him with the highest level of 
utility.

Let us say that Yelberton’s preferred choice is B. Imagine that Yelberton’s annual rate of return raises from 6% to 9%. 
In this case, each time he saves $100,000 in the present, it will be worth $1,327,000 in 30 years from now (using the 
formula for compound interest that $100,000 (1 + 0.09)30 = $1,327,000). A  change  in  rate  of  return  alters  the  
slope  of  the  intertemporal  budget  constraint:  a  higher  rate of  return  or  interest  rate  will  cause  the  
budget  line  to  pivot  upward,  while  a  lower  rate  of  return will cause it to pivot downward. If Yelberton were 
to consume nothing in the present and save all
$1,000,000, with a 9% rate of return, his future consumption would be $13,270,000, as shown on Fig- ure 2.

As the rate of return rises, Yelberton considers a range of choices on the new intertemporal budget constraint. The 
dashed vertical and horizontal lines running through the original choice B help to illustrate his range of options. One 
choice is to reduce present consumption (that is, to save more) and to have considerably higher future consumption at a 
point like J above and to the left of his original choice B. A second choice would be to keep the level of present 
consumption and savings the same, and to receive the benefits of the higher rate of return entirely in the form of 
higher future consump- tion, which would be choice K.

As a third choice Yelberton could have both more present consumption—that is, less savings—but still have higher future 
consumption because of the higher interest rate, which would be choice like L, above and to the right of his original 
choice B. Thus, the higher rate of return might cause Yelberton to save more, or less, or the same amount, depending on 
his own preferences. A fourth choice would be that Yelberton could react to the higher rate of return by increasing his 
current consumption and

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   233

leaving his future consumption unchanged, as at point M directly to the right of his original choice
B. The actual choice of what quantity to save and how saving will respond to changes in the rate of return will vary 
from person to person, according to the choice that will maximize each person’s util- ity.

APPLICATIONS OF THE MODEL OF INTERTEMPORAL CHOICE

The theoretical model of the intertemporal budget constraint suggests that when the rate of return rises, the quantity 
of saving may rise, fall, or remain the same, depending on the preferences of indi- viduals. For the U.S. economy as a 
whole, the most common pattern seems to be that the quantity of savings does not adjust much to changes in the rate of 
return. As a practical matter, many households either save at a fairly steady pace, by putting regular contributions 
into a retirement account or by making regular payments as they buy a house, or they do not save much at all. Of 
course, some people will have preferences that cause them to react to a higher rate of return by increasing their 
quantity of saving; others will react to a higher rate of return by noticing that with a higher rate of return, they 
can save less in the present and still have higher future consumption.

One prominent example in which a higher rate of return leads to a lower savings rate occurs when firms save money 
because they have promised to pay workers a certain fixed level of pension benefits after retirement. When rates of 
return rise, those companies can save less money in the present in their pension fund and still have enough to pay the 
promised retirement benefits in the future.

This insight suggests some skepticism about political proposals to encourage higher savings by pro- viding savers with 
a higher rate of return. For example, Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs) and 401(k) accounts are special savings 
accounts where the money going into the account is not taxed until it is taken out many years later, after retirement. 
The main difference between these accounts is that an IRA is usually set up by an individual, while a 401(k) needs to 
be set up through an employer. By not taxing savings in the present, the effect of an IRA or a 401(k) is to increase 
the return to saving in these accounts.

IRA and 401(k) accounts have attracted a large quantity of savings since they became common in the late 1980s and early 
1990s. In fact, the amount of IRAs rose from $239 million in 1992 to $3.7 billion in 2005 to over $5 billion in 2012, 
as per the Investment Company Institute, a national association of U.S. investment companies. However, overall U.S. 
personal savings, as discussed earlier, actually dropped from low to lower in the late 1990s and into the 2000s. 
Evidently, the larger amounts in these retirement accounts are being offset, in the economy as a whole, either by less 
savings in other kinds of accounts, or by a larger amount of borrowing (that is, negative savings). The following Clear 
It Up further explores America’s saving rates.

A rise in interest rates makes it easier for people to enjoy higher future consumption. But it also allows them to 
enjoy higher present consumption, if that is what these individuals desire. Again, a change in prices—in this case, in 
interest rates—leads to a range of possible outcomes.


HOW DOES AMERICA’S SAVING RATES COMPARE TO OTHER COUNTRIES?

By international standards, Americans do not save a high proportion of their income, as Table 17 shows. The rate of 
gross national saving includes saving by individuals, businesses, and government. By this measure, U.S. national 
savings amount

234                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 



to 17% of the size of the U.S. GDP, which measures the size of the U.S. economy. The comparable world average rate of 
savings is 22%.

Country                                        Gross Domestic Savings as a Percentage of GDP

China                                             51%

India                                               30%

Russia                                            28%

Mexico                                           22%

Germany                                       26%

Japan                                              22%

Canada                                          21%

France                                            21%

Brazil                                             15%

United States                                17%

United Kingdom                          13%
Table 17. National Savings in Select Countries. (Source: http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GNS.ICTR.ZS)




THE UNIFYING POWER OF THE UTILITY-MAXIMIZING BUDGET SET FRAMEWORK

The choices of households are determined by an interaction between prices, budget constraints, and personal 
preferences. The flexible and powerful terminology of utility-maximizing gives economists a vocabulary for bringing 
these elements together.

Not even economists believe that people walk around mumbling about their marginal utilities before they walk into a 
shopping mall, accept a job, or make a deposit in a savings account. However, econ- omists do believe that individuals 
seek their own satisfaction or utility and that people often decide to try a little less of one thing and a little more 
of another. If these assumptions are accepted, then the idea of utility-maximizing households facing budget constraints 
becomes highly plausible.

BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS: AN ALTERNATIVE VIEWPOINT

As we know, people sometimes make decisions that seem “irrational” and not in their own best inter- est.  People’s  
decisions  can  seem  inconsistent  from  one  day  to  the  next  and  they  even  deliberately ignore ways to save 
money or time. The traditional economic models assume rationality, which means that people take all available 
information and make consistent and informed decisions that are in their best interest. (In fact, economics professors 
often delight in pointing out so-called “irrational behav- ior” each semester to their new students, and present 
economics as a way to become more rational.)

But a new group of economists, known as behavioral economists, argue that the traditional method leaves out something 
important: people’s state of mind. For example, one can think differently about money if one is feeling revenge, 
optimism, or loss. These are not necessarily irrational states of mind, but  part  of  a  range  of  emotions  that  
can  affect  anyone  on  a  given  day.  And  what’s  more,  actions under these conditions are indeed predictable, if 
the underlying environment is better understood. So, beftavioral economics seeks to enrich the understanding of 
decision-making by integrating the insights of psychology into economics. It does this by investigating how given 
dollar amounts can

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   235

mean different things to individuals depending on the situation. This can lead to decisions that appear outwardly 
inconsistent, or irrational, to the outside observer.

The way the mind works, according to this view, may seem inconsistent to traditional economists but is actually far 
more complex than an unemotional cost-benefit adding machine.
For example, a traditional economist would say that if you lost a $10 bill today, and also got an extra
$10 in your paycheck, you should feel perfectly neutral. After all, –$10 + $10 = $0. You are the same financially as 
you were before. However, behavioral economists have done research that shows many people will feel some negative 
emotion—anger, frustration, and so forth—after those two things hap- pen. We tend to focus more on the loss than the 
gain. This is known as loss aversion, where a $1 loss pains us 2.25 times more than a $1 gain helps us, according to 
the economists Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky in a famous 1979 article in the journal Econometrica. This insight has 
implications for investing, as people tend to “overplay” the stock market by reacting more to losses than to gains. 
Indeed, this behavior looks irrational to traditional economists, but is consistent once we understand better how the 
mind works, these economists argue.

Traditional economists also assume human beings have complete self-control. But, for instance, peo- ple will buy 
cigarettes by the pack instead of the carton even though the carton saves them money, to keep usage down. They purchase 
locks for their refrigerators and overpay on taxes to force them- selves to save. In other words, we protect ourselves 
from our worst temptations but pay a price to do so. One way behavioral economists are responding to this is by setting 
up ways for people to keep themselves free of these temptations. This includes what are called “nudges” toward more 
rational behavior rather than mandatory regulations from government. For example, up to 20 percent of new employees do 
not enroll in retirement savings plans immediately, because of procrastination or feel- ing overwhelmed by the 
different choices. Some companies are now moving to a new system, where employees are automatically enrolled unless 
they “opt out.” Almost no-one opts out in this program and employees begin saving at the early years, which are most 
critical for retirement.

Another area that seems illogical is the idea of mental accounting, or putting dollars in different men- tal categories 
where they take different values. Economists typically consider dollars to be fungible, or having equal value to the 
individual, regardless of the situation.

You might, for instance, think of the $25 you found in the street differently from the $25 you earned from three hours 
working in a fast food restaurant. The street money might well be treated as “mad money” with little rational regard to 
getting the best value. This is in one sense strange, since it is still equivalent to three hours of hard work in the 
restaurant. Yet the “easy come-easy go” mental- ity replaces  the rational  economizer  because  of the situation,  or 
context, in which the money  was attained.

In another example of mental accounting that seems inconsistent to a traditional economist, a person could carry a 
credit card debt of $1,000 that has a 15% yearly interest cost, and simultaneously have a
$2,000 savings account that pays only 2% per year. That means she pays $150 a year to the credit card company, while 
collecting only $40 annually in bank interest, so she loses $130 a year. That doesn’t seem wise.

The “rational” decision would be to pay off the debt, since a $1,000 savings account with $0 in debt is the equivalent 
net worth, and she would now net $20 per year. But curiously, it is not uncommon for people to ignore this advice, 
since they will treat a loss to their savings account as higher than the

236                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


benefit of paying off their credit card. The dollars are not being treated as fungible so it looks irra- tional to 
traditional economists.

Which view is right, the behavioral economists’ or the traditional view? Both have their advantages, but behavioral 
economists have at least shed a light on trying to describe and explain behavior that has historically been dismissed 
as irrational. If most of us are engaged in some “irrational behavior,” perhaps there are deeper underlying reasons for 
this behavior in the first place.


“EENY, MEENY, MINEY, MOE”—MAKING CHOICES

In what category did consumers worldwide increase their spending during the recession? Higher education. According to 
the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), enrollment in colleges and universities 
rose one-third in China and almost two-thirds in Saudi Arabia, nearly doubled in Pakistan, tripled in Uganda, and 
surged by three million—18 percent—in the United States. Why were consumers willing to spend on education during lean 
times? Both individuals and countries view higher education as the way to prosperity. Many feel that increased earnings 
are a sig- nificant benefit of attending college.
Bureau of Labor Statistics data from May 2012 supports this view, as shown in Figure 3. They show a positive 
correlation between earnings and education. The data also indicate that unemployment rates fall with higher levels of 
education and training.


























Figure 3. The Impact of Education on Earnings and Unemployment Rates, 2012. Those with the highest degrees in 2012 had 
substantially lower unemployment rates whereas those with the least formal education suffered from the highest 
unemploy- ment rates. The national median average weekly income was $815, and the nation unemployment average in 2012 
was 6.8%. (Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, May 22, 2013)

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   237

KEY CONCEPTS AND SUMMARY

When making a choice along the intertemporal budget constraint, a household will choose the com- bination of present 
consumption, savings, and future consumption that provides the most utility. The result of a higher rate of return (or 
higher interest rates) can be a higher quantity of saving, the same quantity of saving, or a lower quantity of saving, 
depending on preferences about present and future consumption. Behavioral economics is a branch of economics that seeks 
to understand and explain the “human” factors that drive what traditional economists see as people’s irrational 
spending deci- sions.

SELF-CHECK QUESTIONS



1.    How would an increase in expected income over one’s lifetime affect one’s intertemporal budget constraint? How 
would it affect one’s consumption/saving decision?
2.    How would a decrease in expected interest rates over one’s working life affect one’s intertemporal budget 
constraint? How would it affect one’s consumption/saving decision?



REVIEW QUESTIONS



1.    According to the model of intertemporal choice, what are the major factors which determine how much saving an 
individual will do? What factors might a behavioral economist use to explain savings decisions?
2.    As a general rule, is it safe to assume that a lower interest rate will encourage significantly lower financial 
savings for all individuals? Explain.



CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS



1.    What do you think accounts for the wide range of savings rates in different countries?
2.    What assumptions does the model of intertemporal choice make that are not likely true in the real world and would 
make the model harder to use in practice?



REFERENCES

Holden, Sarah, and Daniel Schrass. 2012. “The rose of IRAs in U.S Households’ Saving for Retirement, 2012.” ICI 
Research Perspective 18.8 (2012). http://www.ici.org/pdf/per18-08.pdf.

Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky. “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk.”
Econometrica 47.2 (March 1979) 263-291.

Thaler, Richard H. “Shifting Our Retirement Savings into Automatic.” The New York Times, April 6, 2013.
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/07/business/an-automatic-solution-for-the-retirement-savings- 
problem.html?pagewanted=all.

238                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


UNESCO    Institute    for    Statistics.    “Statistics    in    Brief    /    Profiles”    Accessed    August    
2013. http://stats.uis.unesco.org/unesco/TableViewer/document.aspx?ReportId=121                     &IF_Lan- 
guage=en&BR_Country=5580.

GLOSSARY
beftavioral economics a branch of economics that seeks to enrich the understanding of decision- making by integrating 
the insights of psychology and by investigating how given dollar amounts can mean different things to individuals 
depending on the situation.
fungible the idea that units of a good, such as dollars, ounces of gold, or barrels of oil are capable of
mutual substitution with each other and carry equal value to the individual.

SOLUTIONS


Answers to Self-Cfteck Questions

1.    An increase in expected income would cause an outward shift in the intertemporal budget constraint. This would 
likely increase both current consumption and saving, but the answer would depend on one’s time preference, that is, how 
much one is willing to wait to forgo current consumption. Children are notoriously bad at this, which is to say they 
might simply consume more, and not save any. Adults, because they think about the future, are generally better at time 
preference—that is, they are more willing to wait to receive a reward.
2.    Lower interest rates would make lending cheaper and saving less rewarding. This would be reflected in a flatter 
intertemporal budget line, a rotation around the amount of current income. This would likely cause a decrease in saving 
and an increase in current consumption, though the results for any individual would depend on time preference.
