


8.3  UTILITY  AND  PARETO  OPTIMALITY:  THE  ORTHODOX ECONOMIC  VIEW  OF  SOCIAL  WELFARE



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Define Pareto optimality

•    Explain how orthodox determines the conditions for societal well-being to be maximized.

•    Analyze the ethical issues surrounding Pareto optimality.



or orthodox economists the ideal outcome for an economy is an outcome in which Pareto opti- mality is achieved.  The 
concept of Pareto optimality owes its origins to a 19th century Italian mathematician Vilfredo Pareto.  Stated simply, 
the Pareto criterion for determining whether an economy has produced the “best” or “ideal” outcome is fulfilled when 
economic outcomes are such that there is no way to make any one or many people better off without making any one person 
or
many worse off.

On its own the Pareto criterion for social well-being is an attractive proposition.  After all if someone is harmed in 
order to improve the plight of someone else or many others, then it appears obvious that someone is being granted 
preferential treatment at the expense of someone else or many others.  The granting of preferential treatment hardly 
seems fair or equitable.  In this context, the utilization of the Pareto criterion eliminates the need to make those 
choices.

Additionally, the granting of preferential treatment opens the door to a long series of ethical questions that can be 
avoided by applying the Pareto criterion.  On what basis is the decision to harm or benefit being made?  How or when 
are interventions that inflict harm or bestow benefits decided? If an inter- vention does take place, who is making the 
decision to inflict harm or bestow benefits?  What is the degree of harm or benefit triggered by an intervention?  What 
is the ethical basis for intervening? In many ways, whenever a government must make budgetary decisions, it is asking 
and answering these questions.  For example, perhaps government policymakers would like to expand the size of the 
military.  Expanding the size of the military requires that the government finance the expansion of the military.  
Financing military expansion may require that other government spending programs be reduced.  Alternatively, perhaps 
taxes will be raised to pay for the military expansion.  Either way, whomever is responsible for financing the military 
expansion is directly paying for someone else to benefit.  In defense of expanding the military, policymakers may have 
to justify to the public why the public will, presumably, benefit from the expansion of the military.  The Pareto 
criterion appears to clearly answer these questions.  If a society knows when it is in a position of maximum benefit, 
then,

248                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


on the basis of the Pareto criterion, no justification can be made to either harm or benefit anyone, causing all of the 
above questions become moot.

Something important has now been revealed.  The Pareto criterion only becomes applicable when there is a measure of 
what it means for someone, or many, to benefit and for someone, or many, to be harmed.  If some kind of metric exists, 
then, once measured, a society will know when no one person or many can be made better off without someone or many 
being harmed.  Therefore, what is essential to the Pareto criterion is the mechanism a theorist uses to measure and 
determine a society’s overall well being.  For orthodox economists, the measure of individual and social well-being is 
the amount of utility that individuals and society has derived.


UTILITY MAXIMIZATION AND PARETO OPTIMALITY: ETHICAL IMPLICATIONS

Given the nature of utility maximization, human social interaction is reduced to exchange between individuals.  Clearly 
the utility assumption  generates  a distinct depiction of human beings, human needs, and human society.  The utility 
maximizing assumption also generates a specific conception of what is an economically “just” society.  In other words, 
orthodox economics has a specific view of what it believes is the best way for society to be organized economically.

The orthodox worldview can be neatly summarized.  If people desire utility, then people can acquire utility by 
exchanging with others.  Once people exchange with others, the act of exchanging makes them better off.  Once all 
exchanges are complete, all people are as well off as they can become eco- nomically.  If everyone is as well off as 
they can become, then no one, or many, can be made better off without someone, or many, being made worse off.  As far 
as orthodox economics is concerned, soci- ety has reached its ideal, Pareto optimal, outcome because people were free 
to make choices within an economy that facilitates exchanges, namely a market based economy.

At this point it should be clear that utilitarianism provides the philosophical foundation supporting orthodox 
economics while Pareto optimality represents the final outcome of the orthodox social wel- fare theory.  If utility is 
the initial proposition on which orthodox theory is built, and Pareto optimal- ity is the culmination of orthodox 
economic theory, then the utility and Pareto optimality must be intrinsically linked.

The dilemma for orthodox economics is that by accepting the utility theory of value and adopting the Pareto criterion 
as a social welfare measure, orthodox economics produces a very specific, and eth- ically limited, framework.  For 
example, by focusing exclusively on the point of exchange, orthodox economics tends to ignore situations in which 
people are in disagreement with one another, circum- stances of conflict.  The reason why conflict is generally ignored 
is because the conditions of exchange are assumed in advance.  For orthodox economics, the institutions of exchange, 
such as markets, con- tract law, and contract enforcement, are assumed to be in place prior to economic agents 
exchanging. Additionally, by assuming that initial endowments are given, orthodox economics assumes the exis- tence of 
income on the part of trading parties, but generally fails to recognize where income origi- nates.

The trouble for orthodox economics is that it is not hard to imagine a world in which one’s income is affected by 
discriminatory factors such as racism, sexism, sexual orientation or any other divisive perception. In fact, 
imagination is not necessary, as the real world is filled with examples of discrim-

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   249

ination and exploitation.  Regardless of form, the outcome of discrimination is the same, some are able to exploit 
others by virtue of their power to discriminate.  Or, in another example, it is clear that conditions of inequality can 
empower some relative to others.  People that disproportionately benefit from economic outcomes are endowed with more 
income and have the power to acquire resources. In instances in which the acquisition of resources becomes concentrated 
in the hands of a small num- ber of people, those with great wealth and/or income may have the power to exploit their 
positions of power at the expense of others.  Of course, with exploitation, conditions of inequality may be wors- ened 
allowing unequal situations to become further entrenched.

Conscientious observers of a capitalist market system, including utilitarians, are aware that situations of 
exploitation are not only present, but virtually unavoidable.  Given the existence of conflict and inherent disparities 
of power, it is easy to imagine that someone might want to intervene in economic affairs in order to level the playing 
field.  For example, someone might advocate to pass laws to penal- ize discriminatory behavior so as to reduce its 
prevalence, or others might seek to impose taxes on some so as to redistribute income or wealth in the hopes of 
reducing inequality.  The interventions in questions would certainly be designed to make someone, or many, better off 
at the expense of some- one else, or many others.  As a result, no matter how justified the interventionist actions may 
be, and they are certainly justifiable in the examples provided above, within the utilitarian and Pareto crite- rion 
context the interventionist actions cannot be supported!

If  the  significance  of  utilitarianism  and  the  Pareto  criterion  remains  obscure,  then  perhaps  less abstract 
and much more obvious examples may be useful.  The following situations, using subjective measures of utility, are 
Pareto sub-optimal and cannot be justified:

1.   The defeat of Nazi Germany because Adolf Hitler was made worse off.
2.   The end of slavery in the American South because slave owners were made worse off.

Clearly, to any reasonable observer the defeat of Nazi Germany and the end of slavery in the American South are 
justifiable as they ended horrible chapters in human history.  However, by following the utilitarian belief and 
coupling it to the Pareto criterion, orthodox economics cannot really make any argument to defend the destruction of 
Nazi Germany and the conclusion of slavery in the American South.  Subjectively speaking, Hitler’s loss of utility may 
have more than offset the world’s gain in util- ity and thus made the world worse off.  Or, subjectively speaking, the 
loss of utility to slave owners in the South may have more than offset the gain in utility experienced by the former 
slaves.  After all, if no quantifiable measure is possible it is actually impossible to know whether or not total util- 
ity has become larger or smaller so there is no way for a utilitarian to justify an intervention in the above, albeit 
extreme, cases.  Additionally, any intervention in the above cases required someone or many being made worse off in 
order to make some or many better off.  The utilitarian tradition has no adequate way of applying anything more than 
some kind of hedonistic, happiness seeking, value judg- ment to human action.  Obviously, there are serious moral and 
ethical weaknesses associated with the acceptance of utilitarianism.

In summary, the significance and value-laden implications of accepting utility, appears to elude most orthodox  
economists.   In  neoclassical  theory  price  and  utility  are  equalized,  specifically  price  and marginal 
utility.  Therefore, price equals value and this concludes the story.  The neoclassical over- simplification of value 
theory, which treats value and price as synonyms, fails to recognize that by believing in utility, the orthodox 
economist is believing in a set of pre-ordained value judgments.  The importance of this point cannot be overstated.  
Observe the significance of prices in a capitalist econ-

250                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


omy as described in this textbook.  Marveling at how fluidly consumers and producers respond to price changes in 
markets the textbook states:

“…adjustments in response to price changes happen all of the time in a market economy, often so smoothly and rapidly 
that we barely notice them…For both the U.S. economy and the world economy as a whole, markets – that is, demand and 
supply – are the primary social mechanism for answering the basic questions about what is produced, how it is produced, 
and for whom it is produced.”  (pg. 71)

Because prices send the signals that determine the allocation of resources in a market economy, and the allocation of 
resources has tremendous social ramifications, then the question of whether or not the allocation  of resources is  
“socially just”  must  be  addressed.  Because  value  theory provides  the foundation for which the quantitative 
origin of prices, it is value theory then that also provides the basis  for  the  normative  criterion  from  which  
prices  and  the  allocation  of  resources  may  be  inter- preted.  Clearly, the choice of value theory is extremely 
important.

Unfortunately, for orthodox economics, the normative implications of the utilitarian assumption gen- erally lay 
dormant.

As non-orthodox economists are well aware, value theory acts as a cohesive, it is the glue that con- nects economic 
theory to a society’s moral and ethical norms.  Any complete theoretical depiction of economic interaction necessarily 
requires a theory of value.  As such, it is important to self- reflect on what values have been adopted by a theory and 
how those values impact how economic outcomes are  interpreted.     Given  the  importance  of  value  theory,  the  
one  dominant  proposition  presented throughout this paper is that it is absolutely necessary for any economic 
theorist to anchor their the- oretical ideas to a theory of value.  Within this context, however, the utility theory of 
value presents orthodox economists  with a dual horned dilemma.  To accept utility as the basis for their analysis 
means that orthodox economists are implicitly valuing any and all market driven economic outcomes, regardless of the 
negative impacts that those outcomes may have on large segments of the society.  To the contrary, to argue against any 
and all market outcomes as just, an economist, orthodox or other- wise, necessarily must begin their theorizing 
applying a different set of values outside of the value of endless hedonism that is central to utilitarian beliefs.



8.4  ABANDONING  THE  NORMATIVE  CONSTRAINTS  OF UTILITARIANISM



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Explain the basic elements of Amartya Sen’s Capabilities approach

•    Define capabilities and functionings

•    Explain the Marxian Labor Theory of Value and its implications



iven the limitations and challenges associated with utilitarianism, many students of econom- ics seek out alternative 
approaches for measuring economic well-being and interpreting the societal implications of economic outcomes.  The 
following describes, two alternative, hetero-
dox, approaches for interpreting economic conditions.

TWO NORMATIVE EXAMPLES FROM HETERODOX ECONOMICS

Abandoning Utility: The Capabilities Approach the Ethical Considerations of Amartya Sen

Where  do  the  seeds  of  discontent  sprout?   In  1998  Amartya  Sen  was  awarded  the  Nobel  Prize  in economics. 
 Sen is a fascinating case study as he provides an example of an economist who is not a utilitarian.  Early in his 
career Sen had abandoned utilitarianism.  What prompted Sen to abandon utility as a first principle?  The answer to 
this question can be found at the beginning of Sen’s career when Sen encountered a utilitarian tradition in economics 
that had shed nearly all the conventional characteristics of ethical analysis.  While the early 19th century 
utilitarian thinkers such as Bentham had identified and described some of the ethical issues surrounding the idea of 
diminishing marginal utility, by the late 20th century utilitarianism in economics had been reduced to revealed 
preference theory.  For Sen, utilitarianism provides entirely too-narrow an assessment of what it means to be a person. 
 The result is that there are far too many limits associated with utilitarianism for the utilitar- ian to be able to 
make effective, and informed, moral evaluations.

Taken further, Sen also recognizes the link between the moral vacuum produced by utilitarian philos- ophy and the 
neoclassical application of the Pareto criterion.  For Sen, utilitarianism and the Pareto criterion are like a form of 
normative handcuffs.  Neither the distribution of income nor initial util- ities factor in to the choice making, 
exchange story, promoted by orthodox economics.  By ignoring the initial endowments of income or utility, Sen argues 
that a condition of Pareto optimal may also be

252                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


one of deep inequality and hardship.  Those without property and with little income often times find themselves without 
property and little income even though they have engaged in market exchange.

Admittedly, a person’s actual freedom to exchange may provide a person with a degree of additional utility.  Clearly 
being free to make choices is empowering and valuable to individuals.  However, one’s freedom to act does not mean that 
a person is in a remotely decent position in the market.  The fact is, a market outcome can be Pareto optimal and still 
be less than socially optimal.  For example, instead of demanding change people in poor situations often simply adjust 
to their negative circumstances. The deprived find some area of existence that gives them pleasure and make do.  The 
result is a disad- vantaged yet acquiescent populace that not only continues to function, but may be falsely perceived 
as happy or not too sad.  In this example, utilitarianism generates a persistently unfair outcome within a population 
of people ill-equipped to effectively do anything to alter that outcome.  This utilitar- ian picture highlights a 
tendency to under-estimate the plight of people in negative circumstances and causes Sen to conclude that neoclassical 
welfare economics is incapable of addressing the ethical issues that accompany the existence of poverty and oppression.

In  terms  of  the  problems  associated  with  the  distribution  of  utilities,  Sen  criticizes  the  utilitarian 
notion that every action in life is based on pleasure or happiness.  There is no equality to be found in adding up 
everyone’s utility to find a sum of total utility.  It is possible for a maximum of total social utility to be 
generated under a circumstance in which one person receives the largest share of the available utility while many 
others receive very little.  Further, it is not feasible to correct for an unequal distribution of utilities generated 
by market outcomes.  The only way to rectify the impasse requires  that  the  theorist  be  able  to  engage  in  
interpersonal  comparisons  of  well-being.   In  other words, people need to be able to compare how well off they are 
relative to other people.  Relative comparisons are not something to which utility is adept at explaining.  Given all 
of the problems Sen identifies, he departs from utilitarian precepts and develops an alternative measure of economic 
well- being.


The Capabilities Approach

The capabilities approach represents Sen’s alternative to the neoclassical welfare model.  The capa- bilities approach 
is a theoretical device that allows for interpersonal welfare comparisons, while also maintaining the ability and 
freedom of people to make choices.  For Sen, the interpersonal compar- isons of well-being should be based on a group 
of what Sen calls “functionings.”

Functionings – Represents a state of being for an individual as well as the collection of all things an individual can 
be doing.  Functionings can be as basic as being well-nourished and properly sheltered to as challenging as flying an 
airplane.

In turn, the measure of social welfare is the “capability” of people to access and develop their “func- tionings.”

Capability – Is the availability of functionings coupled with the ability of the individual to achieve a combina- tion 
of functionings.

The combination of functionings that are available and the ability of an individual to achieve a com- bination of 
functionings is the measure of an individuals well-being.  Consider the following table.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   253




Limited Capabilities   Greater Capabilities Limited Functionings   Low Welfare                    Moderate Welfare 
Greater Functionings      Moderate Welfare          High Welfare

Based on the capabilities approach, having many options available, such as states of being or activities to pursue, and 
then having the freedom to pursue those options is the ideal.  The highest social welfare is achieved when a society 
produces an environment that meets basic needs while also provide people with ample opportunities to pursue challenging 
and life enriching activities.  To the contrary, having limited access to functionings, and limited freedom in the 
pursuit of those functionings is the least advantageous position.  In the case of moderate welfare outcomes, either 
indiviudals have many pos- sible functionings available, but a limited freedom to pursue those functionings, or a 
limited set of available functionings but substantial freedom to pursue those goals.


BREAKOUT BOX – CAPABILITIES AND FUNCTIONGS EXAMPLES OF                                                WELFARE OUTCOMES



Limited Functionings/Limited Capabilities


Represents a case in which a person or a group of people are living with clearly definable limits to their functionings 
as defined by abject poverty, malnourishment and/or starvation and with little to no medical care.  In this scenario 
the person or people are simply seeking to survive from one day to the next, there is little to no long term planning 
or goals.  Possibly the result of social and political unrest such as a civil war (the current situation in Syria for 
example), or a weather calamity such as a drought, or a socioeconomic order such as the slave economy of the pre-Civil 
War American South.

Given the horrendous living conditions and limited functioning, any person living under these conditions would likely 
attempt make changes in their lives in order to try and reduce their immediate suffering.  The ability to make changes, 
their capabilities, may not be possible as they may be living under conditions of political, military, and economic 
repression. Absent the freedom to maneuver, the person or people in this circumstance are rendered virtually helpless 
to the situa- tion in which they have befallen.  For example, unless the slave is freed, as property, the slave simply 
cannot pursue other options

Limited Functionings/Greater Capabilities


Represents a case in which a person or people are again deeply limited in terms of having basic needs and few wants 
met. In this instance, however, the person or people in this circumstance have some options to escape their plight.  
For exam- ple, consider the scenario of political unrest, if greater capabilities are present, the person or people can 
possibly vacate the region in which the unrest in unfolding.  Evacuation of refugees to other more stable regions of 
the world create capabil- ities for the now displaced residents from a place devoid of functionings to places with both 
functionings and resources to expand capabilities.  Another example could be the freeing of slaves in the American 
South during the post-Civil War period.

Greater Functionings/Limited Capabilities


Represents a case in which a person or people have their basic needs and wants met, while enjoying the luxury of having

254                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 



many other possible functionings available within the society such as educational, health care, and employment oppor- 
tunities.  In this instance, however, the person or people in this circumstance do not have options available to access 
the abundance of functionings.  For example, consider the scenario of repressive political forces that are the result 
of situations of patriarchal social structures, or general totalitarian principles.  A society characterized by 
repressive political regimes will restrict the freedom of its populace to enjoy the varied functionings that exist.  A 
historic example would be the Jewish population that was subjected to the ruling principles of Nazi Germany.

Greater Functionings/Greater Capabilities


Represents a case in which a person or people have their basic needs and wants met, while enjoying the luxury of having 
many other possible functionings available within the society such as educational, health care, and employment 
opportuni- ties.  In this instance, however, the person or people in this circumstance also have a great many options 
available to access the abundance of functionings.  For example, consider the example of the majority of people living 
in economies charac- terized as advanced developed economies with largely democratic political institutions.  Certainly 
there remain conditions of repression such as discrimination, sexism, racism, and any number of limiting conditions.  
However, given democratic political structures and civil society outlets, people are able to continue to press for 
ever-expanding capabilities.

The capabilities approach then is not just a story of the freedom to pursue well-being, such as is the case in the 
story pro- vided by orthodox economics.  Instead, the capabilities approach is asking questions about initial 
endowments, available functionings, as well as the distributional outcomes associated with the pursuit of those 
functionings.  Given the capabil- ities approach, the social welfare analysis of economics is no longer reduced to the 
action of choice making, but rather to both the conditions preceding choice as well as the outcomes associated with 
choices.  While functionings can vary for dif- ferent people across social circumstances, as well as time and place, so 
long as people have the ability to obtain the outlined functionings then they have an opportunity to elevate their 
well-being. Clearly, the capabilities approach represents for Sen, and others, a framework capable of generating more 
ethically pleasing results than that of the utility-tainted Pareto criterion.

In conclusion, Sen has managed to escape the ethical handcuffs of utilitarianism.   The capabilities approach offers 
Sen, and other economists interested in exploring the capabilities approach, a new ethical theory.   Sen has clearly 
avoided the fate of many neoclassical economists, i.e. being able study economics absent ethics.






The Marxian Approach and the Labor Theory of Value

Another  approach  to  applying  normative  reasoning  toward  economic  phenomena  is  the  Marxian labor theory of 
value.  In stark contrast to the utility theory of value, the preanalytic vision associated with the labor theory of 
value produces a view of humanity and human need that is virtually antithet- ical to the utilitarian depiction.  Rather 
than experiencing social interaction through exchange, within the labor theory of value human beings are presented as 
engaged in the act of production.

The basic proposition on which the labor theory of value is constructed is the idea that before some- thing can be 
exchanged it must be produced.  As a result, the value of products is generated at the point of production, where the 
products are created.  At the point of production, labor is the essential component of production processes.  While 
machines can enhance the productivity of human labor,

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   255

machines only exist as a result of the collective accumulation of human labor over time.  Importantly, machines 
themselves do not create labor.  After all, a nail cannot hammer itself.  The implication is that the process of 
production has always required human labor power as even the most sophisticated machines require human operators.

Additionally, production has always been a social endeavor as human beings work with one another to produce those 
things that satisfy the material wants of people.  Consider, for example, a loaf of bread that you see on a grocery 
store shelf.  The production and distribution process necessary to bring the loaf of bread to the grocery store shelf 
is extensive, requiring the contribution of a great many people. For starters, the agricultural process that provides 
the wheat, and/or oats, and/or grains that are the primary ingredients for making bread have to be grown by farmers.  
The number of farmers involved may number in the hundreds or thousands.  Additionally, the farmers will use tools and 
other inputs provided to them by other producers.  Those producer, the producers of farm equipment, will also bring 
together laborers and equipment in a manufacturing process that will build farm equipment. By continuation, the tools 
and equipment used in the manufacturing process that builds farm equip- ment will also have to be produced by laborers 
using other tools and equipment in other production processes, and so on and so forth.  On the other end of the 
production process, after harvesting, the basic agricultural inputs used in making bread will be transported to 
processing facilities.  The act of transportation requires that laborers operate transportation equipment like trains 
and trucks.  Just as was the case with farm equipment, transportation equipment will be made by many laborers that will 
be utilizing many machines that will have been produced by many other laborers using many other machines, and so on and 
so forth.  Of course, transportation equipment generally requires fuel. If the fuel is a petroleum byproduct, then the 
extraction of petroleum will once again require many laborers using significant amounts of equipment through many 
stages of production until a fuel is available that will be used to operate the transportation equipment.  Over and 
over again, each ele- ment of production requires many other laborers in many other production processes in a seemingly 
endless and nearly incomprehensible scale of human interaction.  Clearly, production is an inherently social process 
that only takes place when human beings apply themselves to a multitude of production processes
Because the sole universally necessary element in the production process is labor, labor becomes the only true and 
relevant source of value.  Human history demonstrates that human survival necessitates that human beings engage first 
and foremost in the process of providing for material needs.  If human beings exchange, it is only because they first 
produced an excess that they are willing to exchange. Exchange is not a necessary condition for human survival, whereas 
production is required for human existence.

When juxtaposed, the differences between the vision generated by the utility theory of value and the labor theory of 
value could not be more visible.  Let’s examine four primary differences.

First, orthodox economics  downplays any necessary  human social  relationships,  as individuals  are viewed as 
isolated utility maximizers within orthodox economic thought.  To the contrary, adherents to  the  labor  theory  of  
value  see  human  behavior  itself,  including  exchange  relationships,  as  being the  result  of  social  
relationships.  By  continuation,  a  strong  argument  can  be  made  that  there  are also important historical 
understandings and divisions between the two value theories.  For utility theorists, because  human behavior is 
perceived as a universal constant across time, understanding economic  history  is  not  a  necessary  component  of  
their  theory.   Labor  theorists,  however,  must

256                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


study history closely in order to attempt to understand and identify the important changes in social arrangements that 
have historically arisen in different socioeconomic systems.

Second, due to the fact that exchange is a voluntary form of social interaction, harmonious outcomes appear normal 
within utilitarian thinking.  To the contrary, since labor is the source of value and pro- duction, if there are class 
differences in a society, those class differences will inevitably end in con- flict.  The result is that conflict, not 
harmony, is front and center for labor theorists.

Third, while neoclassical economists take as given individual preferences, and by implication assert that the act of 
choosing is always efficient, labor theorists argue that preferences arise from social relationships and social 
interactions.  As such, adherents to the labor theory of value do not accept the choice-driven revealed preference 
argument on social welfare.

Fourth, whereas orthodox economists identify individual incomes as originating through a voluntary process of exchange 
between individuals whose preferences are given, the labor theorist argues that the income that flows to non-laboring 
classes is the byproduct of a process of exploitation.

Exploitation – The idea that a producer or producers of a product receive compensation that is less than the value of 
what the producer or producers contributed to the production process.

Clearly the utility theory of value and the labor theory of value yield two different and competing conceptions of 
human existence, producing two different normative criteria for evaluating human interaction.

It would appear that the choice of value theory and recognition of its normative impact should be of the utmost 
importance to a theorist.  This is not always the case.  Perhaps due to the obscure relation- ship between price and 
value in neoclassical theory, there are many neoclassical theorists who directly violate the philosophical foundations 
of their accepted theory of value and do so by attempting to temper  the  less-than-savory  ethical  outcomes  present  
in  a  capitalist  market  system.   Alternatively, while most heterodox thinkers openly challenge the ethical outcomes 
of the market system and the conclusions brought about by the use of utility, many very prominent heterodox thinkers 
also either reject the need for a theory of value or do not explicitly endorse a formal theory of value.  Sen falls 
under the latter category.  In both instances value theory’s importance is being inadequately recog- nized.  While 
continued criticism of neoclassical theory is undoubtedly warranted, heterodox econo- mists, regardless of their lofty 
accomplishments, prestige, and respectability, should not be absolved of deserved criticism.  Within this premise, an 
evaluation of the relationship between value theory and Sen’s important contribution to the critique of neoclassical 
welfare economics will be the focus of the remainder of this paper.
