


8.5  CONCLUSION



any students of economics are drawn to the discipline out of an interest in understanding the  social  and  moral  
meaning  and  significance  of  economic  outcomes.   Interpreting  the social and moral meaning of economic outcomes, 
however, requires a set of philosophical
beliefs that can be effectively integrated and tied to economic activity.  In this chapter we have seen how orthodox 
economics entwines utilitarian philosophy to economic activity.  We have also seen the limitations to the utilitarian 
approach in that it gives the adherents to this tradition little to no room to challenge the outcomes associated with 
market economic activity.  In this chapter we have also seen how heterodox economists, by not accepting the utilitarian 
tradition have utilized other philosophical approaches,  such  as  the  capabilities  approach  or  the  labor  theory  
of  value,  to  interpret  economic events.  In the case of these alternative philosophical approaches, market outcomes 
are not assumed to be socially just.  For heterodox economists, as a result of alternative philosophical visions, 
questions of conflict, such as exploitation and discrimination, are directly confronted and possible solutions are 
provided.






CHAPTER 9. AN INSTITUTIONAL ANALYSIS OF MODERN CONSUMPTION




INTRODUCTION  TO  AN  INSTITUTIONAL  ANALYSIS  OF  MODERN CONSUMPTION






































“The damned” by Lorenzo Paolini, depicting consumerism and the barbarization of modern culture, metaphorically. “Jailed 
where they think to freely run, they can’t stop because a delay means death.” (Caption quote from Paolini, Wikimedia, 
CC0 1.0)




WHO ARE WE AND WHAT DO WE WANT?

One of the more notorious elements of the neoclassical perspective in economics is its treatment of people as isolated, 
self- interested individuals.  These ‘economic agents’ are endowed with their own personal ‘utility functions’ and de 
gustibus non

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   261


est disputandum: tastes are simply a matter of personal preference.  The choices we make, then, are nothing more than 
the manifestation of our tastes as we calculate the most satisfaction we can get from our scarce resources–most 
importantly, our money, which we begrudgingly acquire through work.

Pause  for  a  moment  to  think  about  the  following  questions:  what  does  it  mean  to  be  human?   What  is  
our  atomistic approach to utility maximizing agents saying about human nature?  And finally, does this offer a 
complete explanation of why we consume the things we consume (and often times aspire to consume more in the future)?




CHAPTER OBJECTIVES


In this chapter, you will learn about

•    Institutional Analysis
•    Conspicuous Consumption
•    The Complex World of Modern Consumption



The  ‘hedonistic  man’  (or  homo  economicus)  of  neoclassical  economics  is,  as  institutional  economist 
Thorstein Veblen observed,

a lightning calculator of pleasures and pains, who oscillates like a homogeneous globule of desire of happiness under 
the impulse of stimuli that shift him about the area, but leave him intact. He has neither antecedent nor consequent. … 
The hedonistic man is not a prime mover. He is not the seat of a process of living…

In point of fact, however, it seems obvious that

1.   People do behave deliberately and consciously, in ways that affect the world around them – that is, they are prime 
movers, not simply reacting to external changes.
2.   People change, they develop, in ways that cannot simply be construed as reallocations of scarce resources – that 
is, people have antecedents (where they came from) and consequents (where they’re going).

And, perhaps most importantly, people are social.  Homo sapiens is a species that, unlike say lumbricus terrestris 
(earthworms), must live in groups.  This fact has been long recognized.  Take, for instance, Aristotle:

Man is by nature a social animal; an individual who is unsocial naturally and not accidentally is either beneath our 
notice or more than human. Society is something that precedes the individ- ual. Anyone who either cannot lead the 
common life or is so self-sufficient as not to need to, and therefore does not partake of society, is either a beast or 
a god.

While human societies are made up of individuals, any given individual must come out of a society which  existed  
before  she  did.   This  would  suggest  that  our  approach  to  understanding  individual

262                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 

behavior should start with an understanding of society, not the other way around.  In this chapter you will be 
introduced to an alternative, heterodox analysis along these lines: the institutional approach; and you will explore 
the new insights that this analysis brings to the study of consumption in modern economies.
