


9.1  INSTITUTIONAL  ANALYSIS



n economics that treats institutions as primary is necessary to understand the economic behav- ior  of  group-dependent 
 individuals–that  is,  people  making  decisions  within  the  context  of their families, communities, industries, 
and other forms of organization, formal and informal.
It is these social contexts and organizations to which heterodox economists are referring when they use the term 
institutions.  A broad definition of the term might be stated as follows:

Institutions are collectively shared habits of thought–of knowing, doing, and valuing–that control, expand, and 
liberate individual action.

As Aristotle recognized some 24 centuries ago, these institutions exist prior to the individuals born into them.  They 
are the rules we learn that tell us what to do and what not to do.  But as constricting as that may sound, institutions 
also constitute a powerful tool for the human race: they allow individ- uals to forego solving problems that others 
have already solved (so that we don’t have to ‘reinvent the wheel’, as it were); and they create reasonable 
expectations of others’ behavior, allowing us to act col- lectively.  Take, for instance, the simple collectively 
shared habit of thought concerning which side of the road to drive on.  Knowing ahead of time which side we’re to drive 
on saves us from the dangerous requirement of learning through trial and error.  Likewise, this simple institution 
doesn’t just restrict our decisions; it also produces expectations of what others will be doing, allowing us to travel 
more safely than we could without those expectations.  In this manner, our actions are expanded beyond what they could 
otherwise be–we would, in fact, be more limited without this institution.

Of course, individuals are not–and could not be–made to conform precisely to the institutions into which they are 
born–society is not a rigid mold into which each person is poured at birth.  We are ‘prime movers’ capable of making 
our own decisions and, to some extent, of changing the institutions of our society.  But, it is the collective power 
that institutions give human communities as a whole which ultimately liberates us, that allows us to shape our own 
destinies and to participate in the col- lective shaping of our community’s destiny as well.

Finally, as habits, institutions clearly must stay the same over some period of time.  Yet, the technolo- gies, laws, 
culture, and so on–that is, the institutions–of any given society evolve over time, too.  This occurs through the 
accidental and intentional adaptation of how we think–our ‘habits of thought’–to an ever-changing world around us.  
But, this creates an inherent tension within the concept of institu- tions: as the essential means by which humans 
collectively survive, institutions must constantly evolve to meet the proliferating exigencies we face; yet, as habits, 
they must have a resilience to change, a constancy, to be of any use at all.  Recognizing this tension offers an 
important insight into the essen- tial nature of present institutions: our collectively shared habits of thought are 
always a combination of useful ways of solving problems and the useless remnants of old ways of thinking.

With the basic tools and insights of institutional analysis in hand, we turn now to analyzing consump-

264                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 

tion in modern society.  As you’ll see, the decisions we make when it comes to what we consume and why we make those 
decisions can look very different once we take this fundamentally distinct per- spective as our starting point.  Our 
understanding of how we act as consumers depends on our under- standing of who we are as a species.



9.2  CONSPICUOUS  CONSUMPTION



n institutional analysis of modern consumption patterns would, of course, look first and fore- most to a society’s 
institutions to explain these behaviors.  Our tastes and preferences, in this view, are primarily the result, not of 
some abstract lightning calculation of marginal utilities
per dollar, but rather of the common habits of thought shared among our peers, our family, and our society more 
generally.  They do not emerge miraculously from each of our individual constitutions. Instead, they are the result of 
an institutional evolution, occurring in part by unplanned drift, and in part by intentional acts of problem solving, 
ceremonial observance, and persuasion.

In this view, we’re consuming the things we consume today largely because we learned that those things are appropriate 
to consume.  And, importantly, the institutions that define what is and is not appropriate do not entirely reflect what 
is most conducive to nurturing individual well-being, social cooperation, and  sustainable  uses of technology.  
Rather, they will  reflect  in  part  the imbecile  and anachronistic habits of thought inherited from our past.

Take for instance one of Veblen’s best-known concepts, conspicuous consumption: consuming goods not for their capacity 
to produce personal satisfaction (utility), but rather because they allow the con- sumer  to  demonstrate  or  enhance  
her  prestige.   Surely,  a  host  of  examples  come  to  mind  readily: designer clothing that serves no better as 
clothing than equivalents without the brand recognition; upscale dining establishments serving food that is no more 
nutritional than their more modest coun- terparts; sports cars that, while perhaps hypothetically capable of winning 
high-speed races, are no better at what they’ll actually be used for (driving around town and sitting in traffic) than 
an ordinary automobile.  What do all of these have in common?

While one could argue that each of these examples is a good or service of a higher quality than their cheaper 
alternatives, most people would easily recognize that there is an element in each of allowing one to conspicuously 
consume–to ‘show off’ the fact that one has the money to make purchases that others simply could not afford.  The 
question becomes, why would someone go out of their way to spend money on things that, in fact, don’t provide 
additional utility or value in use?  And, as you might have guessed, answering this question requires an analysis of 
the institutions that guide our consump- tion decisions in modern society. The following breakout box points the way 
toward Veblen’s ultimate conclusion.

Sometimes  referred  to  as  the  first  feminist  economist,  Thorstein  Veblen  published  his  “Economic  Theory  of 
 Woman’s Dress” in 1894, breaking down the characteristics of the apparel of his time that offered the consumer 
something more than simply protection from the elements.  His three cardinal principles of women’s dress, each of which 
was “advertising the fiction that they live without any gainful occupation,” were:

266                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 



1.    Expensiveness: clothing “must be uneconomical”–that is, demonstrating that the wearer, or her family, has the 
means to waste money on items of little functional value. High-dollar brand names make this easier to recognize for the 
uninitiated; but ultimately the expense of the work and material that went into producing these items is a more subtle, 
sophisticated way of indicating the same.
2.    Novelty: to the extent that clothing is useful, the wearer must not get the full use value from it. She must 
discard articles well before even insignificant wear starts to show.  Observing seasonal changes in fashion helps to 
coordinate and enforce this sort of consumption observance.
3.    Ineptitude: clothing must show that the wearer doesn’t have to participate in useful work. For instance, clothing 
might be severely binding, or footwear might restrict movement.


Can you think of any examples of consumption goods outside of women’s apparel that fit this description?  My personal 
favorite comes from men’s professional clothing: the necktie.  As you’re probably aware, neckties don’t serve much of a 
function–they’re certainly not providing warmth, and in fact they’re not even covering up an otherwise naked part of 
the body.  So why do some men find themselves compelled not only to buy and wear these products, but to periodically 
discard the old ones and purchase new ones?

A common response from students is: they make you look professional.  But, that just begs the question, why do they 
make you look professional–that is, why do we associate neckties with professionalism?  Surely men in most professions 
don’t actually make use of the tie in their work (though I’ve found they make a convenient wipe for smudged 
eyeglasses).  Con- sider Veblen’s cardinal principles above as applied to the necktie.


1.    Expensiveness: while presumably whatever function neckties serve could be equally well-served were they made from 
a relatively inexpensive material like cotton (or, for that matter, paper), they tend instead to be made of more 
expensive materials like silk.
2.    Novelty: those who follow men’s fashion will know that neckties are subject to similar style changes as other 
types of clothing–in terms, especially, of patterns and widths. Most people are probably able to discern a tie that was 
purchased in the 1980s versus the 2010s, much as most people can give a rough date to when a car was produced just by 
looking at it.
3.    Ineptitude: paradoxically, to demonstrate professionalism, men are often expected to wear apparel that does more 
to hinder than to aid their capacity for work. The delicate and expensive fabric, for instance, indicates that the 
‘professional man’ is not likely doing work that would involve ‘getting his hands dirty’ in the literal sense. 
Likewise, it would not typically be wise to wear a long necktie in a manufacturing context in which machines are being 
used, lest the tie get caught in the machine.


These are strange principles by which to guide your consumption goods, indeed; and certainly not ones that are limited 
to women’s dress–or even clothing in general.  A little reflection on modern culture and the reader could probably see 
these principles in much of what we consume today.  But, again, why are these apparently useless and even wasteful 
elements so desireable to the modern consumer?  Why would someone want to waste money, or to show off they they don’t 
contribute to society?  The remainder of this section will give a summary explanation.



It goes almost without saying that, as social creatures, we humans feel a sense of self-esteem based in part on how we 
think others see us.  We strive to fit in, to avoid feeling inferior, and at times to

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   267

show our superiority to others–which, of course, must make others feel inferior.  But, how we do so is dictated by the 
accepted social norms–the institutions–that we were born into; and those institutions have mutated through generations 
to produce a ‘strange’ set of criteria for who is superior and who is inferior.

In much earlier  times one’s prowess,  the respect  afforded by one’s peers,  would reflect  chiefly the capacity  to  
ably  accomplish  something  that  was  useful  to  the  group.   As  humans’  technologies improved, however, it 
became increasingly the case that:

1.   The greatest contribution to current productivity came from the countless generations of workers, inventors, 
engineers, and so on from whom society had inherited its industrial arts. And,
2.   As technologies became increasingly sophisticated, more and more people, each having increasingly specialized 
skills, was necessary to efficiently produce things with these more sophisticated technologies.

The problem with these developments is that it becomes very difficult to differentiate one person’s contribution from 
another’s, or, more accurately, from the general productivity of the group acting collectively.

Consequently, over a very long time the presumption developed that how much you contributed rel- ative to others would 
simply be reflected in how much money you made (whether this is true or not is another matter altogether).  But this 
presented a problem for establishing the amount of prestige others should afford you: how much you have in your bank 
account isn’t typically public information, and politeness dictates that you shouldn’t go around waving your most 
recent ATM account balance slip in people’s faces.  The solution?  Demonstrate your prowess, as evidenced by your vast 
riches, by wasting money wherever possible.

Part of this anthropological history, which can only be given in the most rudimentary of forms here, also demonstrates 
a division of employments in terms of prestige.  In particular, early humans gar- nered prestige from exercising their 
power over the natural world–hunting and killing large game, or  controlling  the  floods  through  irrigation  
channels,  for  instance.   However,  once  technologies improved, it became increasingly the case that demonstrating 
power meant controlling or extracting from the productive community itself–that is, from people–more so than from 
nature.  As a result, the higher classes came to be associated with occupations of predation, control, and leisure–for 
instance, politics and war, management and finance, celebrity and fashion, . With consumption as the chief way to 
demonstrate, and to reinforce in the minds of one’s peers, that one belongs to the ‘better’ class of people, our 
institutions began to prescribe an element of ineptitude, showing exemption from useful labor.



9.3  THE  COMPLEX  WORLD  OF  MODERN  CONSUMPTION



he institutional analysis of conspicuous consumption demonstrates the importance of moving past notions of utility 
maximization, and beginning to look at the historical and cultural reasons behind individual consumers’ decisions.  
Yet, consider the following

•   Americans are exposed to hundreds, perhaps thousands, of advertisements every day
•   Some consumers are willing to camp outside of stores for days just to be the first to purchases a new product
•   The traditional holiday of Thanksgiving has now been paired with (if not eclipsed by) the so- called ‘Black Friday’ 
it precedes

These and many other examples might be taken to suggest that it is not only the individual decisions of consumers 
concerning what to buy that needs to be explained.  Rather, we should also be looking to understand consumerism–the 
social preoccupation with acquiring and, most importantly, identi- fying with consumer goods–as well.

To understand the importance of advertising and consumerism today, the best place to start is with the work of 
institutional economist John Kenneth Galbraith.  In The Affluent Society (1958) and later in The New Industrial State 
(1967), Galbraith argued forcefully that the historical conditions that classical and neoclassical economists were 
chiefly concerned with–namely, production of necessities amidst widespread poverty and the allocation of scarce 
resources–had been superseded by an age of relative affluence.  Mass production, as you’ll see in a later chapter of 
this textbook, had largely solved the problem of producing enough to adequately meet the needs of the people (though 
ensuring everyone has access to basic necessities remains a problem to this day).  Of course, solving one problem 
presents new ones, and for Galbraith one of the most important problems society had come to face was how to ensure that 
there would be demand for what could be produced once our basic needs were met.

Enter  the  adman.   As  Galbraith  argued,  advertising  and  salesmanship  became  important  once  our basic needs 
were, for the most part, easily met, and our remaining desires were no long immediately evident to us.  Advertising and 
salesmanship functioned, then, to ‘synthesize, elaborate, and nurture’ our desires for goods and services beyond those 
serving simply to keep us fed, clothed, sheltered, and so on.  Another way to look at it: where businesses had come 
increasingly to serve customers in ways that went beyond providing the goods and services to meet basic needs, these 
businesses required a way to maintain demand–the willingness to buy–where hunger, cold, and so on would not.  In this 
manner, advertising and salesmanship became a form of ‘demand management’, designed to keep sales up, to keep people 
buying even after they would have otherwise felt satisfied.

With the ascendancy of marketing, the products we buy come to take on special characteristics as their design 
increasingly reflects the needs of businesses to sell as much as our own personal wants and

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   269






















The 1959 Cadillac Eldorado, sporting the decorative tailfins that reflected the increasing influence of marketing on 
automobile design in the mid-20th century. (Wikimedia user Veesixteen. Public Domain)

needs.  More or less superficial options for colors and frequent style changes, for instance, demon- strate that 
consumption is, increasingly, a conspicuous act.

But more than this, these new characteristics indicate that people are associating their very identities with the 
consumption choices they make.  Consider, for instance, what kind of car you would prefer to drive versus what kind of 
car you wouldn’t want to ‘be caught dead in’.  Or, ask yourself why it is common to see groups of people who are all 
dressed similarly.  It’s likely not difficult to see that con- sumption and identity have become significantly 
intertwined in modern culture.

But what of the rebels–the people who refuse to conform?  As you might have guessed, today there are plenty of products 
available for her as well.  Consider the New York advertising firm Doyle Dane Bernbach’s  campaign  to  sell  the  
Volkswagen  Beetle  in  the  1960s.   The  ads  famously  used  wit  and humor to target drivers who favored 
reliability and affordability over the increasingly common con- spicuous  consumption  elements  of  American  
automobiles.   A  1963  magazine  spread,  for  instance, depicted 15 identical images of the Beetle with model years 
from 1945 to 1963 under each image, indicating the utter lack of changes in the body design over this period.  With 
advertising like this Volkswagen was able to successfully market its products to the consumers who didn’t accommodate 
themselves to the mainstream preferences of the time.

The  Volkwagen  ad  campaign  of  the  1960s  might  be  taken  as  marketing  naturally  restraining  the potential 
excesses of conspicuous consumption: needless model changes and functionless decorations were explicitly rejected, even 
mocked, in these ads.  However, the important thing to recognize is that it also allowed consumers to display their of 
independence from the cultural trends while still main- taining their relationship with the businesses that provide 
these goods.

270                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 

Over  the  decades  this  form  of  marketing  has  evolved  into  what  institutional  economist  Philip Mirowski 
calls “murketing”: a form of marketing in which businesses promote the belief that con- sumers are ‘too smart’ to be 
fooled or persuaded by advertising, brands, and so on.  With that belief firmly held, consumers are free to buy what 
they want, safe in the knowledge that their decisions are their own.  Self-reflection becomes unnecessary, and 
(potentially all) differences of opinion, whether political, cultural, or otherwise, become expressible through the 
conspicuous consumption of goods and services.  In this manner, the very concept of Self is reduced to selections from 
a menu of shop- ping  opportunities;  the  boundaries  between  a  person’s  identity  and  businesses’  marketing  
become murky–hence, “murketing.”

The curious result of all of this is that our consumption choices, our preferences, our very identifies seem more and 
more to be adjusted to fit the goods and services available for purchase, rather the reverse. To be sure, this is not a 
criticism of individuals who prefer one branded identity over another. It is, rather, an observation of the extent to 
which the complexity of the practices of conspicuous con- sumption and corporate demand management have coevolved.
