


9.4  CONCLUSION



he  neoclassical  approach  to  understanding  consumption  decisions  appears  to  make  a  lot  of sense, given the 
specific (perhaps peculiar) way the question is posed.  Why do people buy what they  buy?  Because  they  prefer  these 
 things  over  others.  Of  course!  But  how  well  does  this
approach  answer  the  truly  interesting  questions  of  modern  consumption  decisions?   Why,  for instance, do some 
people buy sports cars only to park them with everyone else in rush hour traffic? Why is it that, when we go to buy 
clothes, we spend so little time comparing the warmth and durabil- ity of the materials, and so much time on the finer 
details of ‘how it looks’?  De gustibus non est dis- putandum leads the neoclassical analysis to conclude simply that 
these are the elements which provide the most utility, leaving the critical thinker to ask: well, why are these the 
major elements of utility? (Naturally, to argue that we prefer the things that give us utility, and the things that 
give us utility are the things we prefer, is little more than an exercise in circular reasoning after all.)

Jettisoning the overly constricting assumption of de gustibus non est disputandum allows us to move on to an 
institutional analysis; and with that analysis we can begin to answer the really interesting ques- tions.  Once we 
accept that humans are naturally, inherently social creatures, and that a society’s insti- tutions evolve over time, we 
can begin to understand how consumption patterns reflect partly the needs and desire of individuals, but also in part 
the received ‘habits of thought’ of the societies these individuals were born into.  We can develop plausible 
explanations, like conspicuous consumption, for why consumers appear to be purchasing things for their disutility or 
their wastefulness.

These theories, in turn, bring to light new questions.  For instance, what is the relationship between the producers of 
consumer goods and the desires of consumers if not simply for the former to cater to the latter?  What is the nature of 
the Self, how is that constrained by a culture of consumerism, and how might it break free of those constraints?  These 
may be difficult questions to answer within the standard framework of neoclassical economics.  Because of this, 
heterodox economics often turn to an institutional analysis instead.


WHO ARE WE AND WHAT DO WE WANT?

Certainly, the basic purpose of this textbook is to introduce the student to how economists explain the way our economy 
works.  But it’s worth pausing for a moment to reflect on the following question: are you, the student, being trained 
in something more than theories that explain the consumption, production, and distribution of goods and services?  Does 
it go deeper than that?

In a recent interview, linguist Noam Chomsky was asked if he agreed with the view that “bedrock human nature” indicated 
that we, as people, are “selfish and really seeking material comfort…that we can never get away from that–that’s what 
we are.”  Chomsky’s response was that such a view was a product of the last century of advertising, rather than any 
scientific study of actual human nature.  “The natural thing for humans,” Chomsky argued, “is to want to be 
independent, creative.…

272                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


































Anti-consumerism graffiti in Oslo, Norway. (Wikimedia user Anne-Sofie Ofrim. CC BY-SA 3.0)


People, I think, want dignity and a sense of self-worth, and a sense of creating and doing something that’s important; 
that’s what we are.  I think it’s taken huge efforts, enormous efforts–a huge part of the economy is devoted to trying 
to drive these things out of people’s heads, to make you think that all you want is more commodities…”

It is worth considering where an introductory economics class (and textbook) fits into the broader culture in which we 
live.  While economists surely strive to be objective social scientists, it is impossible for us to completely divorce 
ourselves from the societies in which we were brought up.  Is it possible, therefore, that the stories we tell about, 
for instance, con- sumer choices have embedded in them certain assumptions about what it is to be human?  And, 
furthermore, is it possible that those assumptions are in part a reflection of the very societies we’re trying to 
understand?  As this chapter has demon- strated, regardless of your personal beliefs about human nature, asking these 
questions is important if we’re to properly understand our economy as it evolves through time.



CHAPTER 10. COST AND INDUSTRY STRUCTURE




INTRODUCTION  TO  COST  AND  INDUSTRY  STRUCTURE



























Figure 1. Amazon is an American international electronic commerce company that sells books, among many other things, 
shipping them directly to the consumer. There is no brick-and-mortar Amazon store. (Credit: mod- ification of work by 
William Christiansen/Flickr Creative Commons)


AMAZON

In less than two decades, Amazon.com has transformed the way books are sold, bought, and even read. Prior to Amazon, 
books were primarily sold through independent bookstores with limited inventories in small retail locations. There were 
exceptions, of course; Borders and Barnes & Noble offered larger stores in urban areas. In the last decade, however, 
inde- pendent bookstores have become few and far between, Borders has gone out of business, and Barnes & Noble is 
strug- gling. Online delivery and purchase of books has indeed overtaken the more traditional business models. How has 
Amazon changed the book selling industry? How has it managed to crush its competition?
A major reason for the giant retailer’s success is its production model and cost structure, which has enabled Amazon to 
undercut the prices of its competitors even when factoring in the cost of shipping. Read on to see how firms great 
(like Amazon) and small (like your corner deli) determine what to sell, at what output and price.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   275
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES


Introduction to Cost and Industry Structure
In this chapter, you will learn about:

•    Explicit and Implicit Costs, and Accounting and Economic Profit

•    The Structure of Costs in the Short Run

•    The Structure of Costs in the Long Run



his chapter is the first of four chapters that explore the theory of the firm. This theory explains that  firms  behave 
 in  much  the  same  way  as  consumers  behave.  What  does  that  mean?  Let’s define what is meant by the firm. A 
firm (or business) combines inputs of labor, capital, land,
and raw or finished component materials to produce outputs. If the firm is successful, the outputs are more valuable 
than the inputs. This activity of production goes beyond manufacturing (i.e., making things). It includes any process 
or service that creates value, including transportation, distribution, wholesale and retail sales. Production involves 
a number of important decisions that define the behav- ior of firms. These decisions include, but are not limited to:

•   What product or products should the firm produce?
•   How should the products be produced (i.e., what production process should be used)?
•   How much output should the firm produce?
•   What price should the firm charge for its products?
•   How much labor should the firm employ?

The answers to these questions depend on the production and cost conditions facing each firm. The answers also depend 
on the structure of the market for the product(s) in question. Market structure is a multidimensional concept that 
involves how competitive the industry is. It is defined by questions such as these:

•   How much market power does each firm in the industry possess?
•   How similar is each firm’s product to the products of other firms in the industry?
•   How difficult is it for new firms to enter the industry?
•   Do firms compete on the basis of price, advertising, or other product differences?

Figure 2 illustrates the range of different market structures, which we will explore in Perfect Compe- tition, 
Monopoly, and Monopolistic Competition and Oligopoly.

First let’s take a look at how firms determine their costs and desired profit levels. Then we will discuss costs in the 
short run and long run and the factors that can influence each.

276                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 















Figure  2.  The  Spectrum  of  Competition.  Firms  face  different  competitive  situations.  At  one extreme—perfect  
competition—many  firms  are  all  trying  to  sell  identical  products.  At  the  other extreme—monopoly—only  one  
firm  is  selling  the  product,  and  this  firm  faces  no  competition. Monopolistic  competition  and  oligopoly  
fall  between  the  extremes  of  perfect  competition  and monopoly. Monopolistic competition is a situation with many 
firms selling similar, but not identical, products. Oligopoly is a situation with few firms that sell identical or 
similar products.
