


CHAPTER 24. PUBLIC ECONOMY




INTRODUCTION  TO  PUBLIC  ECONOMY































Figure 1. Domestic Tires? While these tires may all appear similar, some are made in the United States and others are 
not. Those that are not could be subject to a tariff that could cause the cost of all tires to be higher. (Credit: 
modification of work by Jayme del Rosario/Flickr Creative Commons)


CHINESE TIRE TARIFFS

Do you know where the tires on your car are made? If they were imported, they may be subject to a tariff (a tax on 
imported goods) that could raise the price of your car. What do you think about that tariff? Would you write to your 
representative or your senator about it? Would you start a Facebook or Twitter campaign?
Most people are unlikely to fight this kind of tax or even inform themselves about the issue in the first place. In The 
Logic of Collective Action (1965), economist Mancur Olson challenged the popular idea that, in a democracy, the 
majority view will prevail, and in doing so launched the modern study of public economy, sometimes referred to as 
public choice, a subtopic of microeconomics. In this chapter, we will look at the economics  of government  policy, why 
smaller, more organized groups have an incentive to work hard to get certain policies enacted, and why lawmakers 
ultimately make decisions that may result in bad economic policy.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   679
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES


Introduction to Public Economy
In this chapter, you will learn about:

•    Voter Participation and Costs of Elections

•    Special Interest Politics

•    Flaws in the Democratic System of Government



s President Abraham Lincoln famously said in his 1863 Gettysburg Address, democratic govern- ments are supposed to be 
“of the people, by the people, and for the people.” Can we rely on democratic governments to enact sensible economic 
policies? After all, they react to voters, not
to analyses of demand and supply curves. The main focus of an economics course is, naturally enough, to analyze the 
characteristics of markets and purely economic institutions. But political institutions also play a role in allocating  
society’s scarce resources, and economists  have played an active role, along with other social scientists, in 
analyzing how such political institutions work.

Other chapters of this book discuss situations in which market forces can sometimes lead to undesir- able results: 
monopoly, imperfect competition, and antitrust policy; negative and positive externali- ties; poverty and inequality of 
incomes; failures to provide insurance; and financial markets that may go from boom to bust. Many of these chapters 
suggest that government economic policies could be aimed at addressing these issues.

However, just as markets can face issues and problems that lead to undesirable outcomes, a demo- cratic system of 
government can also make mistakes, either by enacting policies that do not benefit society as a whole or by failing to 
enact policies that would have benefited society as a whole. This chapter discusses some practical difficulties of 
democracy from an economic point of view: the actors in the political system are presumed to follow their own 
self-interest, which is not necessarily the same as the public good. For example, many of those who are eligible to 
vote do not, which obviously raises questions about whether a democratic system will reflect everyone’s interests. 
Benefits or costs of government action are sometimes concentrated on small groups, which in some cases may orga- nize 
and have a disproportionately large impact on politics and in other cases may fail to organize and end up neglected. A 
legislator who worries about support from voters in his or her district may focus on spending projects specific to the 
district without sufficient concern for whether this spending is in the interest of the nation.

When more than two choices exist, the principle that the majority of voters should decide may not always make logical 
sense, because situations can arise where it becomes literally impossible to decide what the “majority” prefers. 
Government may also be slower than private firms to correct its mistakes, because government agencies do not face 
competition or the threat of new entry.



24.1  VOTER  PARTICIPATION  AND  COSTS  OF  ELECTIONS



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Explain the significance of rational ignorance

•    Evaluate the impact of election expenses



n U.S. presidential elections over the last few decades, about 55% to 65% of voting-age citizens actually voted, 
according to the U.S. Census. In congressional elections when there is no presiden- tial race, or in local elections, 
the turnout is typically lower, often less than half the eligible voters.
In other countries, the share of adults who vote is often higher. For example, in national elections since the 1980s in 
Germany, Spain, and France, about 75% to 80% of those of voting age cast ballots. Even this total falls well short of 
100%. Some countries have laws that require voting, among them Australia, Belgium, Italy, Greece, Turkey, Singapore, 
and most Latin American nations. At the time the United  States  was  founded,  voting  was  mandatory  in  Virginia,  
Maryland,  Delaware,  and  Georgia. Even  if  the  law  can  require  people  to  vote,  however,  no  law  can  
require  that  each  voter  cast  an informed  or  a  thoughtful  vote.  Moreover,  in  the  United  States  and  in  
most  countries  around  the world, the freedom to vote has also typically meant the freedom not to vote.

Why do people not vote? Perhaps they do not care too much about who wins, or they are uninformed about who is running, 
or they do not believe their vote will matter or change their lives in any way. Indeed, these reasons are probably tied 
together, since people who do not believe their vote matters will not bother to become informed or care who wins. 
Economists have suggested why a utility-max- imizing person might rationally decide not to vote or not to become 
informed about the election. While a few elections in very small towns may be decided by a single vote, in most 
elections of any size, the margin of victory is measured in hundreds, thousands, or even millions of votes. A rational 
voter will recognize that one vote is extremely unlikely to make a difference. This theory of rational ignorance holds 
that people will not vote if the costs of becoming informed and voting are too high, or they feel their vote will not 
be decisive in the election.

In a 1957 work, An Economic Theory of Democracy, the economist Antftony Downs stated the problem this way: “It seems 
probable that for a great many citizens in a democracy, rational behavior excludes any  investment  whatever  in  
political  information  per  se.  No  matter  how  significant  a  difference between parties is revealed to the 
rational citizen by his free information, or how uncertain he is about which party to support, he realizes that his 
vote has almost no chance of influencing the outcome… He will not even utilize all the free information available, 
since assimilating it takes time.” In his classic

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   681

1948 novel Walden Two, the psychologist B. F. Skinner puts the issue even more succinctly via one of his characters, 
who states: “The chance that one man’s vote will decide the issue in a national elec- tion…is less than the chance that 
he will be killed on his way to the polls.” The following Clear It Up feature explores another aspect of the election 
process: spending.


HOW MUCH IS TOO MUCH TO SPEND ON AN ELECTION?

According to a report from The New York Times, the 2012 elections for president, Congress, and state and local offices, 
saw a total of about $5.8 billion spent. The money raised went to the campaigns, including advertising, fundraising, 
travel, and staff. Many people worry that politicians spend too much time raising money and end up entangled with 
special inter- est groups that make major donations. Critics would prefer a system that restricts what candidates can 
spend, perhaps in exchange for limited public campaign financing or free television advertising time.
How much spending on campaigns is too much? Five billion dollars will buy a lot of potato chips, but in the U.S. 
economy, which  exceeded  $16  trillion  in  2012,  the  $5.8  billion  spent  on  political  campaigns  was  about  
1/25  of  1%  of  the  overall economy. Here is another way to think about campaign spending. Total government spending 
programs in 2009, including federal and state governments, was about $5.1 trillion, so the cost of choosing the people 
who would determine how this money would be spent was about 1/10 of 1% of that. In the context of the enormous U.S. 
economy, $5.8 billion is not as much money as it sounds. U.S. consumers spend about $2 billion per year on toothpaste 
and $7 billion on hair care prod- ucts. In 2008, Proctor and Gamble spent $4.8 billion on advertising. It may not be 
sensible to believe the United States is going to decide its presidential elections for less than we spend on 
toothpaste or than Proctor and Gamble spends on advertisements.
Whatever we believe about whether candidates and their parties spend too much or too little on elections, the U.S. 
Supreme Court has placed limits on how government can limit campaign spending. In a 1976 decision, Buckley v. Valeo, 
the Supreme Court emphasized that the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution specifies freedom of speech. The federal 
government and states can offer candidates a voluntary deal in which government makes some public financing available 
to candidates, but only if the candidates agree to abide by certain spending limits. Of course, candidates can also 
voluntarily agree to set certain spending limits if they wish. But government cannot forbid people or organizations to 
raise and spend money above these limits if they choose.
In 2002, Congress passed and President George W. Bush signed into law the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act (BCRA). The 
relatively noncontroversial portions of the act strengthen the rules requiring full and speedy disclosure of who con- 
tributes money to campaigns. However, some controversial portions of the Act limit the ability of individuals and 
groups to make certain kinds of political donations and they ban certain kinds of advertising in the months leading up 
to an election. These bans were called into question after the release of two films: Michael Moore’s Fahrenheit 9/11 
and Citizens United’s Hillary: The Movie. At question was whether each film sought to discredit political candidates 
for office too close to an elec- tion, in violation of the BCRA. Moore’s film was found by lower courts not to violate 
the Act, while Citizens United’s was. The fight reached the Supreme Court, as Citizens  United v. Federal Election  
Commission, saying that the First Amendment protects the rights of corporations as well as individuals to donate to 
political campaigns. The Court ruled, in a 5–4 deci- sion, that the spending limits were unconstitutional. This 
controversial decision, which essentially allows unlimited con- tributions by corporations to political action 
committees, overruled several previous decisions and will likely be revisited in the future, due to the strength of the 
public reaction. For now, it has resulted in a sharp increase in election spending.

While  many  U.S.  adults  do  not  bother  to  vote  in  presidential  elections,  more  than  half  do.  What 
motivates them? Research on voting behavior has shown that people who are more settled or more “connected” to society 
tend to vote more frequently. According to the Washington Post, more married people vote than single people. Those with 
a job vote more than the unemployed. Those who have lived longer in a neighborhood are more likely to vote than 
newcomers. Those who report that they

682                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


know their neighbors and talk to them are more likely to vote than socially isolated people. Those with a higher income 
and level of education are also more likely to vote. These factors suggest that politicians are likely to focus more on 
the interests of married, employed, well-educated people with at least a middle-class level of income than on the 
interests of other groups. For example, those who vote may tend to be more supportive of financial assistance for the 
two-year and four-year colleges they expect their children to attend than they are of medical care or public school 
education aimed at families of the poor and unemployed.

Visit this website to see a breakdown of how different groups voted in 2012.












A number of proposals have been offered to encourage greater voter turnout: making it easier to reg- ister to vote, 
keeping the polls open for more hours, or even moving Election Day to the weekend, when fewer people need to worry 
about jobs or school commitments. However, the changes that have been made do not seem to have caused a long-term 
upward trend in the number of people voting. After all, casting an informed vote will always impose some costs of time 
and energy. It is not clear how to strengthen people’s feeling of connectedness to society in a way that will lead to a 
substan- tial increase in voter turnout. Without greater voter turnout, however, politicians elected by the votes of 
60% or fewer of the population may not enact economic policy in the best interests of 100% of the population. 
Meanwhile, countering a long trend toward making voting easier, many states have recently erected new voting laws that 
critics say are actually barriers to voting. States have passed laws reducing early voting, restricting groups who are 
organizing get-out-the-vote efforts, enacted strict photo ID laws, as well as laws that require showing proof of U.S. 
citizenship. The ACLU argues that while these laws profess to prevent voter fraud, they are in effect making it harder 
for individuals to cast their vote.

KEY CONCEPTS AND SUMMARY

The theory of rational ignorance says voters will recognize that their single vote is extremely unlikely to influence 
the outcome of an election. As a consequence, they will choose to remain uninformed about issues and not vote. This 
theory helps explain why voter turnout is so low in the United States.

SELF-CHECK QUESTIONS



1.    Based on the theory of rational ignorance, what should we expect to happen to voter turnout as the Internet makes 
information easier to obtain?
2.    What is the cost of voting in an election?

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   683
REVIEW QUESTIONS


How does rational ignorance discourage voting?



CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS



1.    What are some reasons people might find acquiring information about politics and voting rational, in contrast to 
rational ignorance theory?
2.    What are some possible ways to encourage voter participation and overcome rational ignorance?
3.    Given that rational ignorance discourages some people from becoming informed about elections, is it necessarily a 
good idea to encourage greater voter turnout? Why or why not?



REFERENCES

Olson, Mancur. The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of Groups, (Boston: Harvard University 
Press, 1965).

Downs, Anthony. An Economic Theory of Democracy. New York: Harper, 1957. Skinner, B.F. Walden Two. Indianapolis: 
Hackett Publishing Company, Inc., 1948.
American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU). “Voting Rights.” https://www.aclu.org/voting-rights.

The    New    York    Times.    “The    2012    Money    Race:    Compare    the    Candidates.”    http://elec- 
tions.nytimes.com/2012/campaign-finance.

The Washington Post. “Exit Polls 2012: Where Americans Stood this Election.” Last modified Novem- ber    7,   2012.    
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/special/politics/2012-exit-polls/national- breakdown/.

Cornell  University  Law  School:  Legal  Information  Institute.  “Citizens  United  v.  Federal  Election Committee 
(No. 08-205).” Last modified January 21, 2010. http://www.law.cornell.edu/supct/html/ 08-205.ZS.html.

U.S. Department of Commerce: United States Census Bureau. “Voting and Registration: Historical Time Series Tables; 
Table A-9: Reported Voting Rates in Presidential Election Years, by Selected Char- acteristics: November 1964 to 2012.” 
http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/socdemo/voting/publica- tions/historical/index.html

GLOSSARY
rational ignorance the theory that rational people will not vote if the costs of becoming informed and voting are too 
high or because they know their vote will not be decisive in the election

684                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 



SOLUTIONS


Answers to Self-Cfteck Questions

1.    All other things being equal, voter turnout should increase as the cost of casting an informed vote decreases.
2.    The cost in time of voting, transportation costs to and from the polling place, and any additional time and 
effort spent becoming informed about the candidates.
