


CHAPTER 8. CHALLENGING THE ROLE OF UTILITARIANISM




THE  ROLE  OF  VALUE(S)  IN  THE  ECONOMICS  DISCIPLINE



CHAPTER OBJECTIVES


In this chapter, you will learn about:

•    Value Theory in Economics
•    Value as it is Defined by Orthodox Economics
•    The Relationship between Utilitarian Philosophy and the Economics discipline.
•    Critique of the Utilitarian Approach.
•    The Application in Economics of Philosophies other than Utilitarianism.



8.1  ECONOMICS  AND  VALUE



LEARNING OBJECTIVES


By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Define the term value.
•    Identify different interpretations of the term value.



he term value and the concept of value tfteory have taken on two distinct definitions in rela- tion to economic theory. 
 The first definition of the term value pertains to the role of normative analysis within economic theory.  As 
discussed in chapter 1, for orthodox economic thinkers
there is little room for normative thinking in the rigorous world of scientific economics.    Subjective or moral 
judgments are discouraged in favor of utilizing a positive, value-free approach that is not a statement of anyone’s 
value judgment or subjective feelings, but rather of what “is.”  By the standard orthodox textbook definition, the term 
“value” relates to personal biases and subjective beliefs.  Also, recall from Chapter 2, the positive versus normative 
conflict presented by orthodox economics rep- resents a false dichotomy.  As has been discussed by non-orthodox 
economic theorists, subjective val- ues tend to be present in all economic paradigms and are unavoidable.

The second definition of value that is common in economics is the one most people think of when they think of the term 
“value.”  For most people when they think of the value of something, such as a product, they are simultaneously 
thinking of the price of that product.  Therefore, the term value and the term price tend to be used interchangeably.  
As a result, for many economists it is important to develop a theory of value because the theory of value provides the 
theorist with a sense of the origin of prices.  After all, if an economist can identify the root source of value, then 
the same economist will also understand the root origin of prices.  Since prices are incredibly important informational 
signals, being able to explain from where prices originate adds an important depth to economic theory.

On the surface both usages of the term “value,” as described above, appear to be mutually exclusive. However, closer 
inspection reveals two interrelated issues.   Scientists, economists included, already tend to, whether knowingly or 
unknowingly, assert subjective values within their theories.  Values not only generate a necessary entanglement of 
facts and values, but they then become present throughout the very act of theorizing.  In the case of economics, this 
means that the economic ideas that theorists present will include elements of their basic worldview or, as some would 
say, their philosophy.

The remainder of this chapter is laid out in such a manner as to explore the role of philosophy in economics.  First, 
the philosophical foundation of orthodox economics, and its history, is explored. As will be shown, orthodox economics 
relies upon utilitarian philosophy for its value-based under-

242                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 

standing of human action and motivation.  As such, orthodox economics believes that the concept of utility holds the 
key to understanding the origin of prices.  Additionally, utilitarianism forms the basis for the ethical perspective 
presented by orthodox economics.  Upon closely examining the orthodox story of utility, the chapter moves on to 
identify important limitations that develop as a result of the use of utility.  The chapter then moves on to provide 
alternative examples from heterodox economics, pointing out philosophical worldviews outside of utilitarianism that can 
form the basis of economic thought.  Importantly, the alternative approaches presented do not suffer the pitfalls that 
are present within the orthodox, utilitarian approach.








LEARNING OBJECTIVES


By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Identify the history of utility and its relationship to economic ideas.
•    Define use-value
•    Contrast Adam Smith and Jeremy Bentham with regard to their view of utility.
•    Contrast cardinal and ordinal utility
•    Define revealed preference theory



or those interested in the study of economics the concept of utility has a long history.  Going back to the time of 
antiquity, great thinkers such as Aristotle made reference to the importance of the creation of use-value.  From an 
Aristotelian standpoint use-value is the idea that human
material production ought to be directed toward the creation of things that benefit human beings. Aristotle prioritized 
usefulness and discouraged wastefulness.

The role of the utility theory of value as a central component of the preferred ideological vision of orthodox 
economists of today, in some ways dates back to the time of Adam Smith.  Smith, continu- ing the Aristotelian line of 
thinking, also saw significance in the concept of use-value.

Use-Value – The idea that the value of an object is based on how useful the product is to the consumer.  Products have 
an intrinsic value to their consumers.

For Smith though, use-value represented the perceived benefit that people would derive from con- sumption.  For Smith, 
consumers would be more apt to buy products that they perceived as useful as opposed to products that they believed are 
not useful.  Still, Smith’s analysis remains a long way from how utility is utilized by orthodox economists.

Although Smith does not go into much further development beyond his acknowledgement that con- sumers  attach  some  
kind  of use-value  to useful items,  it is clear that Smith  opens the door to the potential development of the idea 
that utility plays a role in determining the prices of products.  Con- sider,  if  utility,  or  use-value,  is  
important  to  consumers,  then,  presumably,  utility  must  play  a  role in determining consumers’ interest in 
purchasing a product.  Because consumer demand is a reflec- tion of consumer purchasing interests, consumer demand will 
be essential to the determination of the prices of products.  It is with the evolution of economic ideas in the 19th 
century that the relationship between utility and prices is cemented within orthodox economic thought.

In order to understand the role of utility in contemporary orthodox economics, the place to begin is

244                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 

with the early 19th century philosopher and political economist Jeremy Bentham.  Bentham possibly had the most 
prominent influence on the philosophical development of utility.  Bentham’s perspective is known as utilitarianism.  
Bentham describes utility as the cornerstone of the “Greatest Happiness Principle.”  In Bentham’s usage, utility 
evolves beyond a description of usefulness into the embodi- ment of happiness.  Utilitarianism espouses the belief that 
people are pleasure maximizers and pain minimizers.  Therefore, any action that a person engages in must be driven by 
the desire either to gain happiness or to reduce pain.  Taken to the field of economics, in Bentham’s view, people 
desire products because those products bring the person happiness.  Clearly, Bentham’s perspective had a profound 
effect on orthodox economics, given the many references that this textbook has made in Chapters 2 and 6 to consumers 
being driven to maximize their utility.

Bentham’s story, for all of its applicability to contemporary orthodox economics, is still only a partial analysis.  
One area in which Bentham’s argument is incomplete is in his treatment of the measurability of utility.  When 
describing how a consumer may assign utility to a product, Bentham freely employed both cardinal and ordinal measures 
of utility.

Cardinal utility – Is the idea that the utility a consumer assigns to a product is objective and, therefore, quan- 
tifiably measurable.

Ordinal utility – Is the idea that the utility that a consumer assigns to a product is subjective, in the mind of the 
consumer, and is, therefore, not directly quantifiably measurable.

As a rule Bentham seemed to generally acknowledge ordinal utility as being conceptually sound in comparison to cardinal 
utility.  Bentham understood that cardinal utility cannot be objectively mea- sured, a person cannot be attached to a 
device that measures units of happy (utils).  There are, how- ever,  indirect  measures  that  can  allude  to  
cardinal  utility,  such  as  the  order  in  which  consumers purchase products.  Given two products with an identical 
price, if a consumer purchases one of the products prior to the other, it stands to reason that the first product 
purchased retain greater utility than the second product.  Regardless, in absolute terms, how much utility a consumer 
actually assigns to a product cannot be empirically measured, rendering it subjective to the consumer.  Limitations 
aside, Bentham frequently developed examples that required cardinal measures of utility.

Another area in which Bentham’s analysis was incomplete pertained to the relationship between util- ity and the origins 
of prices of products.  Recall the principle of diminishing marginal utility described in Chapter 6.  Bentham 
anticipates the idea of diminishing marginal utility by describing instances in which a person can acquire more of 
something but feel less satisfaction from the additional unit than they received from earlier units.  Bentham’s 
depiction, however, remains abstract rather than appear- ing “scientifically” concrete.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   245


















Portrait of Jeremy Bentham (Source: Wellcome Images, Wikimedia, CC-BY 4.0)

Resolving some of the incomplete features of Bentham’s story are the marginalists of the 1870s.  Inde- pendent of one 
another, a group of thinkers triggered what is now referred to as the marginalist rev- olution.  The marginalists 
famously apply differential calculus to utility analysis.  Differential calculus focuses on rates of change between two 
variables.  In the case of utility, differential calculus can be used to tell a story about how, as a consumer consumes 
more of a product, the happiness derived from that product will change.  The marginalists attempted to demonstrate, in 
a more concrete way, the idea that as more of something is consumed, the satisfaction or utility per unit would 
decline.  By applying calculus, and drawing pictures to reflect the conclusions drawn from the mathematical pre- 
sentation, the marginalists create the appearance of a scientific advancement in the study of utility in economics.  In 
terms of legacy, the marginalists use of calculus is a hallmark of modern orthodox eco- nomic theory.

As much as the marginalists influence the apparatus of modern orthodox economics, their analysis still remained 
incomplete in that the marginalists do not resolve the issue of ordinal versus cardinal utility.  It is not until the 
20th century that orthodox economic theorists settle on the use of ordinal utility as the foundation of their 
measurement of utility.  The thinker most responsible for solidifying ordinal utility’s place within economics is Paul 
Samuelson.  Paul Samuelson develops a theory known as  Revealed  Preference.   On  the  surface,  revealed  preference  
theory  articulates  the  idea  that  the amount of utility that any one person derives from the consumption of a 
product is purely subjective to the consumer in question.  However, once a consumer identifies that which brings them 
the greater happiness, the consumer then reveals their preferences to everyone by consuming the product that they 
desire.  In this respect, revealed preference theory seeks to quantify utility by identifying utility as a consequence 
of a consumer’s actions.


THE  APPLICATION  OF  UTILITARIANISM  WITHIN  ORTHODOX  ECONOMICS  AND  ITS IMPLICATIONS.

246                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 

Whether an unwitting or a conscious choice, utility continues to be the preferred philosophical start- ing point for 
contemporary orthodox economists.  Utility also carries with it a specific interpretation of human actions and 
interactions.  Recall, for orthodox economics, the human being is a hedonist continually in search of greater pleasure 
or diminished pain.  Any socially determined characteris- tics are given (not analyzed, merely accepted), yielding an 
isolated utility maximizer.  Also, recall, that this notion of a hedonistic person is deeply controversial with respect 
to its application in econom- ics.  There simply does not exist irrefutable evidence that individuals only pursue 
products because those products provide the individual with pleasure.  Human motive can be defined in many ways with 
hedonism being just one of many interpretations.

Regardless of its accuracy or inaccuracy, orthodox economists perceive that, for individuals, utility is maximized 
through the act of exchange.  At any particular point in time, an individual, possessing an initial endowment (income), 
begins engaging in the act of exchange with some other individual eco- nomic agent.  As all exchanges are assumed to be 
voluntary, any exchange that two parties are will- ing to engage in must be an exchange that will make both parties 
better off, otherwise neither party would engage  in the exchange.  Because  being  made better  off means,  according 
to orthodox eco- nomic theory, acquiring more utility, the act of exchanging is the act increasing one’s holdings of 
util- ity.  Any and all exchanges then must be increasing individual, and subsequently, society’s total utility. 
Presumably, once some kind of round of exchanges is complete, any and all parties that engaged in exchanges are now 
better off because now they have more utility as a result of their exchanges.

Of course, no one really knows whether or not the result of these exchanges really has made the par- ticipants better 
off or worse off because there is no device that measures utility.  Utility is purely sub- jective and non-empirical, 
which means that the revealed preference argument yields an outcome in which it must be assumed that all exchange 
participants are made better, otherwise they would not have participated in the exchange.  Assuming people are better 
off does not mean that people are actu- ally better off.
