


CHAPTER 18. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AND NEGATIVE EXTERNALITIES




INTRODUCTION  TO  ENVIRONMENTAL  PROTECTION  AND NEGATIVE  EXTERNALITIES























Figure 1. Environmental Debate. Across the country, countless people have protested, even risking arrest, against the 
Keystone XL Pipeline. (Credit: modification of image by “NoKXL”/Flickr Creative Commons)


KEYSTONE XL

You might have heard about Keystone XL in the news. It is a pipeline system designed to bring oil from Canada to the 
refineries near the Gulf of Mexico, as well as to boost crude oil production in the United States. While a private 
company, TransCanada, will own the pipeline, U.S. government approval is required because of its size and location. The 
pipeline is being built in four phases, with the first two currently in operation, bringing oil from Alberta, Canada, 
east across Canada, south through the United States into Nebraska and Oklahoma, and northeast again to Illinois. The 
third and fourth phases of the project, known as Keystone XL, would create a pipeline southeast from Alberta straight 
to Nebraska, and then from Oklahoma to the Gulf of Mexico.
Sounds like a great idea, right? A pipeline that would move much needed crude oil to the Gulf refineries would increase 
oil production for manufacturing needs, reduce price pressure at the gas pump, and increase overall economic growth. 
Sup- porters argue that the pipeline is one of the safest pipelines built yet, and would reduce America’s dependence on 
politically vulnerable Middle Eastern oil imports.
Not so fast, say its critics. The Keystone XL would be constructed over an enormous aquifer (one of the largest in the 
world) in the Midwest, and through an environmentally fragile area in Nebraska, causing great concern among 
environmental- ists about possible destruction to the natural surroundings. They argue that leaks could taint valuable 
water sources and construction of the pipeline could disrupt and even harm indigenous species. Environmentalist groups 
have fought gov- ernment approval of the proposed construction of the pipeline, and as of press time the pipeline 
projects remain stalled.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   477



Of course, environmental concerns matter when discussing issues related to economic growth. But how much should they 
factor in? In the case of the pipeline, how do we know how much damage it would cause when we do not know how to put a 
value on the environment? Would the benefits of the pipeline outweigh the opportunity cost? The issue of how to balance 
economic progress with unintended effects on our planet is the subject of this chapter.


CHAPTER OBJECTIVES


Introduction to Environmental Protection and Negative Externalities
In this chapter, you will learn about:

•    The Economics of Pollution

•    Command-and-Control Regulation

•    Market-Oriented Environmental Tools

•    The Benefits and Costs of U.S. Environmental Laws

•    International Environmental Issues

•    The Tradeoff between Economic Output and Environmental Protection



n 1969, the Cuyahoga River in Ohio was so polluted that it spontaneously burst into flame. Air pollution was so bad at 
that time that Chattanooga, Tennessee was a city where, as an article from Sports Illustrated put it: “the death rate 
from tuberculosis was double that of the rest of Tennessee and triple that of the rest of the United States, a city in 
which the filth in the air was so bad it melted nylon  stockings  off  women’s  legs,  in  which  executives  kept  
supplies  of  clean  white  shirts  in  their offices so they could change when a shirt became too gray to be 
presentable, in which headlights were
turned on at high noon because the sun was eclipsed by the gunk in the sky.”

The  problem  of  pollution  arises  for  every  economy  in  the  world,  whether  high-income  or  low- income, and 
whether market-oriented or command-oriented. Every country needs to strike some bal- ance between production and 
environmental quality. This chapter begins by discussing how firms may fail to take certain social costs, like 
pollution, into their planning if they do not need to pay these costs. Traditionally, policies for environmental 
protection have focused on governmental limits on how much of each pollutant could be emitted. While this approach has 
had some success, economists have suggested a range of more flexible, market-oriented policies that reduce pollution at 
a lower cost. We will consider both approaches, but first let’s see how economists frame and analyze these issues.



18.1  THE  ECONOMICS  OF  POLLUTION



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Explain and give examples of positive and negative externalities

•    Identify equilibrium price and quantity

•    Evaluate how firms can contribute to market failure



rom 1970 to 2012, the U.S. population increased by one-third and the size of the U.S. economy more than doubled. Since 
the 1970s, however, the United States, using a variety of anti-pollu- tion policies, has made genuine progress against 
a number of pollutants. Table 1 lists the change
in carbon dioxide emissions by users of energy (from residential to industrial) according to the U.S. Energy 
Information Administration (EIA). The table shows that emissions of certain key air pollutants declined substantially 
from 2007 to 2012; they dropped 730 million metric tons (MMT) a year—a 12% reduction. This seems to indicate that 
progress has been made in the United States in reducing overall carbon dioxide emissions, which cause greenhouse gases.

Primary Fossil Fuels                              Purcftased Electric Power         Total Primary Fossil Fuels End-use 
Sector               Coal     Petroleum      Natural Gas
Residential                        (0)          (14)                   (31)                       (134)                 
                                 (179)
Commercial                     (2)          (2)                      (7)                         (126)                  
                                (136)
Industrial                          (40)       (62)                   31                         (118)                  
                                (191)
Transportation                0            (228)                 5                           (1)                        
                              (224)
Power                                (464)     (36)                   (122)                    –                        
                                 –
Change 2007–2012        (508)     (342)                 121                       (378)                                 
                 (730)
Table 1. U.S. Carbon Dioxide (CO2) Emissions from Fossil Fuels Consumed 2007–2012, Million Metric Tons (MMT) per Year. 
(Source: EIA Monthly Energy Review)

Despite the gradual reduction in emissions from fossil fuels, many important environmental issues remain.  Along  with  
the  still  high  levels  of  air  and  water  pollution,  other  issues  include  hazardous waste disposal, 
destruction of wetlands and other wildlife habitats, and the impact on human health from pollution.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   479

EXTERNALITIES
Private markets,  such  as  the  cell  phone  industry,  offer  an  efficient  way  to  put  buyers  and  sellers 
together and determine what goods are produced, how they are produced, and who gets them. The principle that voluntary 
exchange benefits both buyers and sellers is a fundamental building block of the economic way of thinking. But what 
happens when a voluntary exchange affects a third party who is neither the buyer nor the seller?

As an example, consider a concert producer who wants to build an outdoor arena that will host coun- try music concerts 
a half-mile from your neighborhood. You will be able to hear these outdoor con- certs while sitting on your back 
porch—or perhaps even in your dining room. In this case, the sellers and buyers of concert tickets may both be quite 
satisfied with their voluntary exchange, but you have no voice in their market transaction. The effect of a market 
exchange on a third party who is out- side or “external” to the exchange is called an externality. Because 
externalities that occur in market transactions affect other parties beyond those involved, they are sometimes called 
spillovers.

Externalities  can be  negative or positive.  If  you hate  country music,  then having  it  waft  into  your house 
every night would be a negative externality. If you love country music, then what amounts to a series of free concerts 
would be a positive externality.

POLLUTION AS A NEGATIVE EXTERNALITY
Pollution is a negative externality. Economists illustrate the social costs of production with a demand and supply 
diagram. The social costs include the private costs of production incurred by the company and  the  external  costs  of 
 pollution  that  are  passed  on  to  society.  Figure  1  shows  the  demand  and supply for manufacturing 
refrigerators. The demand curve (D) shows the quantity demanded at each price. The supply curve (Sprivate) shows the 
quantity of refrigerators supplied by all the firms at each price if they are taking only their private costs into 
account and they are allowed to emit pollution at zero cost. The market equilibrium (E0), where quantity supplied and 
quantity demanded are equal, is at a price of $650 and a quantity of 45,000. This information is also reflected in the 
first three columns of Table 2.


Price    Quantity
Demanded
Quantity Supplied before Considering Pollution Cost
Quantity Supplied after Considering Pollution Cost
$600    50,000                         40,000                                                                           
     30,000
$650    45,000                         45,000                                                                           
     35,000
$700    40,000                         50,000                                                                           
     40,000
$750    35,000                         55,000                                                                           
     45,000
$800    30,000                         60,000                                                                           
     50,000
$850    25,000                         65,000                                                                           
     55,000
$900    20,000                         70,000                                                                           
     60,000
Table 2. A Supply Shift Caused by Pollution Costs

However, as a by-product of the metals, plastics, chemicals and energy that are used in manufacturing refrigerators, 
some pollution is created. Let’s say that, if these pollutants were emitted into the air and water, they would create 
costs of $100 per refrigerator produced. These costs might occur because of injuries to human health, property values, 
wildlife habitat, reduction of recreation possibilities, or

480                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 

























Figure 1. Taking Social Costs into Account: A Supply Shift. If the firm takes only its own costs of production into 
account, then its supply curve will be Sprivate, and the market equilibrium will occur at E0. Accounting for additional 
 external  costs  of  $100  for  every  unit  pro- duced, the firm’s supply curve will be Ssocial. The new equilibrium 
will occur at E1.

because of other negative impacts. In a market with no anti-pollution restrictions, firms can dispose of certain wastes 
absolutely free. Now imagine that firms which produce refrigerators must factor in these external costs of 
pollution—that is, the firms have to consider not only the costs of labor and materials needed to make a refrigerator, 
but also the broader costs to society of injuries to health and other values caused by pollution. If the firm is 
required to pay $100 for the additional external costs of pollution each time it produces a refrigerator, production 
becomes more costly and the entire sup- ply curve shifts up by $100.

As illustrated in the fourth column of Table 2 and in Figure 1, the firm will need to receive a price of $700 per 
refrigerator and produce a quantity of 40,000—and the firm’s new supply curve will be Ssocial. The new equilibrium will 
occur at E1, taking the additional external costs of pollution into account results in a higher price, a lower quantity 
of production, and a lower quantity of pollution. The following Work It Out feature will walk you through an example, 
this time with musical accom- paniment.


IDENTIFYING THE EQUILIBRIUM PRICE AND QUANTITY

Table 3 shows the supply and demand conditions for a firm that will play trumpets on the streets when requested. Output 
is measured as the number of songs played.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   481

Price    Quantity
Demanded
Quantity Supplied witftout paying tfte costs of tfte externality
Quantity Supplied after paying tfte costs of tfte externality

$20       0                                      10                                                                     
                                        8

$18       1                                      9                                                                      
                                         7

$15       2.5                                   7.5                                                                     
                                       5.5

$12       4                                      6                                                                      
                                         4

$10       5                                      5                                                                      
                                         3

$5          7.5                                   2.5                                                                   
                                         0.5
Table 3. Supply and Demand Conditions for a Trumpet-Playing Firm

Step 1. Determine the negative externality in this situation. To do this, you must think about the situation described 
and consider all parties that might be impacted. A negative externality might be the increase in noise pollution in the 
area where the firm is playing.
Step 2. Identify the equilibrium price and quantity when only private costs are taken into account, and then when 
social costs are taken into account. Remember that equilibrium is where the quantity demanded is equal to the quantity 
supplied. Step 3. Look down the columns to where the quantity demanded (the second column) is equal to the “quantity 
supplied without paying the costs of the externality” (the third column). Then refer to the first column of that row to 
determine the equilibrium price. In this case, the equilibrium price and quantity when only private costs are taken 
into account would be at a price of $10 and a quantity of five.
Step 4. Identify the equilibrium price and quantity when the additional external costs are taken into account. Look 
down the columns of quantity demanded (the second column) and the “quantity supplied after paying the costs of the 
externality” (the fourth column) then refer to the first column of that row to determine the equilibrium price. In this 
case, the equilib- rium will be at a price of $12 and a quantity of four.
Step 5. Consider how taking the externality into account affects the equilibrium price and quantity. Do this by 
comparing the two equilibrium situations. If the firm is forced to pay its additional external costs, then production 
of trumpet songs becomes more costly, and the supply curve will shift up.

Remember that the supply curve is based on choices about production that firms make while looking at their marginal 
costs, while the demand curve is based on the benefits that individuals perceive while maximizing utility. If no 
externalities existed, private costs would be the same as the costs to society as a whole, and private benefits would 
be the same as the benefits to society as a whole. Thus, if no externalities existed, the interaction of demand and 
supply will coordinate social costs and benefits.

However, when the externality of pollution exists, the supply curve no longer represents all social costs. Because 
externalities represent a case where markets no longer consider all social costs, but only some of them, economists 
commonly refer to externalities as an example of market failure. When there is market failure, the private market fails 
to achieve efficient output, because either firms do not account for all costs incurred in the production of output 
and/or consumers do not account for all benefits obtained (a positive externality). In the case of pollution, at the 
market output, social costs of production exceed social benefits to consumers, and the market produces too much of the 
product.

We can see a general lesson here. If firms were required to pay the social costs of pollution, they would create less 
pollution but produce less of the product and charge a higher price. In the next module, we will explore how 
governments require firms to take the social costs of pollution into account.

482                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 

KEY CONCEPTS AND SUMMARY

Economic production can cause environmental damage. This tradeoff arises for all countries, whether high-income  or  
low-income,  and  whether  their  economies  are  market-oriented  or  command-ori- ented.

An externality occurs when an exchange between a buyer and seller has an impact on a third party who is not part of the 
exchange. An externality, which is sometimes also called a spillover, can have a negative or a positive impact on the 
third party. If those parties imposing a negative externality on others had to take the broader social cost of their 
behavior into account, they would have an incen- tive to reduce the production of whatever is causing the negative 
externality. In the case of a positive externality, the third party is obtaining benefits from the exchange between a 
buyer and a seller, but they are not paying for these benefits. If this is the case, then markets would tend to under 
produce output because suppliers are not aware of the additional demand from others. If the parties that are generating 
benefits to others would be somehow compensated for these external benefits, they would have an incentive to increase 
production of whatever is causing the positive externality.

SELF-CHECK QUESTIONS



1.    Identify the following situations as an example of a negative or a positive externality:

a.    You are a birder (bird watcher), and your neighbor has put up several birdhouses in the yard as well as planting 
trees and flowers that attract birds.
b.    Your neighbor paints his house a hideous color.
c.    Investments in private education raise your country’s standard of living.
d.    Trash dumped upstream flows downstream right past your home.
e.    Your roommate is a smoker, but you are a nonsmoker.

2.    Identify whether the market supply curve will shift right or left or will stay the same for the following:

a.    Firms in an industry are required to pay a fine for their emissions of carbon dioxide.
b.    Companies are sued for polluting the water in a river.
c.    Power plants in a specific city are not required to address the impact of their emissions on the quality of air.
d.    Companies that use fracking to remove oil and gas from rock are required to clean up the damage.

3.    For each of your answers to Self-Check Question 2, will equilibrium price rise or fall or stay the same?
4.    The supply and demand conditions for a manufacturing firm are given in Table 4. The third column represents a 
supply curve without taking the social cost of pollution into account. The fourth column represents the supply curve 
when the firm is required to take the social cost of pollution into account. Identify the equilibrium before the social 
cost of production is included and after the social cost of production is included.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   483

Price    Quantity
Demanded
Quantity Supplied witftout paying tfte cost of tfte pollution
Quantity Supplied after paying tfte cost of tfte pollution

$10       450                              400                                                                          
                  250

$15       440                              440                                                                          
                  290

$20       430                              480                                                                          
                  330

$25       420                              520                                                                          
                  370

$30       410                              560                                                                          
                  410
Table 4.





REVIEW QUESTIONS



1.    What is an externality?
2.    Give an example of a positive externality and an example of a negative externality.
3.    What is the difference between private costs and social costs?
4.    In a market without environmental regulations, will the supply curve for a firm take into account private costs, 
external costs, both, or neither? Explain.



CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS



Suppose you want to put a dollar value on the external costs of carbon emissions from a power plant. What information 
or data would you obtain to measure the external [not social] cost?



PROBLEMS



1.    Show the market for cigarettes in equilibrium, assuming that there are no laws banning smoking in public. Label 
the equilibrium private market price and quantity as Pm and Qm. Add whatever is needed to the model to show the impact 
of the negative externality from second-hand smoking. (Hint: In this case it is the consumers, not the sellers, who are 
creating the negative externality.) Label the social optimal output and price as Pe and Qe. On the graph, shade in the 
deadweight loss at the market output.
2.    Refer to Table 2. The externality created by the production of refrigerators was $100. However, once both the 
private and additional external costs were taken into consideration, the market price increased by only
$50. If the external costs were $100 why did the price only increase by $50 when all costs were taken into account?
3.    Table 5, shows the supply and demand conditions for a firm that will play trumpets on the streets when requested. 
Qs1 is the quantity supplied without social costs. Qs2 is the quantity supplied with social costs. What is the negative 
externality in this situation? Identify the equilibrium price and quantity when only private costs are taken into 
account, and then when social costs are taken into account. How does taking the externality into account affect the 
equilibrium price and quantity?

484                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 




P         Qd    Qs1     Qs2

$20    0        10       8

$18    1        9         7

$15    2.5     7.5      5.5

$12    4        6         4

$10    5        5         3

$5       7.5     2.5      0.5
Table 5.



REFERENCES

Johnson,  Oscar  William.  “Back  on  Track:  Earth  Day  Success  Story;  The  Chattanooga  Choo-Choo No Longer Spews 
Foul Air.” Sports Illustrated. April 30, 1990. http://www.si.com/vault/1990/04/30/ 
121923/back-on-track-earth-day-success-story-the-chattanooga-choo-choo-no-longer-spews-foul- air.

U.S. Energy Information Administration. “Total Energy: Monthly Energy Review.” U.S. Department of Energy. Accessed 
December 19, 2013. http://www.eia.gov/totalenergy/data/monthly/.

GLOSSARY
additional external cost additional costs incurred by third parties outside the production process when a unit of 
output is produced
externality a market exchange that affects a third party who is outside or “external” to the exchange;
sometimes called a “spillover”
market failure When the market on its own does not allocate resources efficiently in a way that balances social costs 
and benefits; externalities are one example of a market failure
negative externality a situation where a third party, outside the transaction, suffers from a market
transaction by others
positive externality a situation where a third party, outside the transaction, benefits from a market transaction by 
others
social costs costs that include both the private costs incurred by firms and also additional costs
incurred by third parties outside the production process, like costs of pollution
spillover see externality

SOLUTIONS


Answers to Self-Cfteck Questions

1.                a.    positive externality
b.    negative externality
c.    positive externality
d.    negative externality

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   485




e.    negative externality

2.                a.    supply shifts left
b.    supply shifts left
c.    supply stays the same
d.    supply shifts left

3.                a.    price will rise
b.    price will rise
c.    price stays the same
d.    price will rise.

4.    The original equilibrium (before the external social cost of pollution is taken into account) is where the 
private supply curve crosses the demand curve. This original equilibrium is at a price of $15 and a quantity of 440. 
After taking into account the additional external cost of pollution, the production becomes more costly, and the supply 
curve shifts up. The new equilibrium will be at a price of $30 and a quantity of 410.
