


CHAPTER 1. WELCOME TO ECONOMICS!




INTRODUCTION

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                         1






























Figure 1. Do You Use Facebook? Economics is greatly impacted by how well information travels through society. Today, 
social media giants Twitter, Facebook, and Instagram are major forces on the information super highway. (Credit: Johan 
Larsson/Flickr)


DECISIONS … DECISIONS IN THE SOCIAL MEDIA AGE

To post or not to post? Every day we are faced with a myriad of decisions, from what to have for breakfast, to which 
route to take to class, to the more complex—“Should I double major and add possibly another semester of study to my 
education?” Our response to these choices depends on the information we have available at any given moment; information 
economists call “imperfect” because we rarely have all the data we need to make perfect decisions. Despite the lack of 
perfect informa- tion, we still make hundreds of decisions a day.
And now, we have another avenue in which to gather information—social media. Outlets like Facebook and Twitter are 
altering the process by which we make choices, how we spend our time, which movies we see, which products we buy, and 
more. How many of you chose a university without checking out its Facebook page or Twitter stream first for information 
and feedback?
As you will see in this course, what happens in economics is affected by how well and how fast information is 
disseminated through a society, such as how quickly information travels through Facebook. “Economists love nothing 
better than when deep and liquid markets operate under conditions of perfect information,” says Jessica Irvine, 
National Economics Editor for News Corp Australia.
This leads us to the topic of this chapter, an introduction to the world of making decisions, processing information, 
and

2                       ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 



understanding behavior in markets —the world of economics. Each chapter in this book will start with a discussion about 
current (or sometimes past) events and revisit it at chapter’s end—to “bring home” the concepts in play.


CHAPTER OBJECTIVES


Introduction
In this chapter, you will learn about:

•    What Is Economics, and Why Is It Important?

•    Microeconomics and Macroeconomics

•    How Economists Use Theories and Models to Understand Economic Issues

•    How Economies Can Be Organized: An Overview of Economic Systems



hat is economics and why should you spend your time learning it? After all, there are other disciplines you could be 
studying, and other ways you could be spending your time. As the Bring it Home feature just mentioned, making choices 
is at the heart of what economists
study, and your decision to take this course is as much as economic decision as anything else.

Economics is probably not what you think. It is not primarily about money or finance. It is not pri- marily about 
business. It is not mathematics. What is it then? It is both a subject area and a way of viewing the world.



1.1  WHAT  IS  ECONOMICS,  AND  WHY  IS  IT  IMPORTANT?



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Discuss the importance of studying economics

•    Explain the relationship between production and division of labor

•    Evaluate the significance of scarcity



conomics is the study of how humans make decisions in the face of scarcity. These can be indi- vidual decisions, family 
decisions, business decisions or societal decisions. If you look around carefully, you will see that scarcity is a fact 
of life. Scarcity means that human wants for goods, services and resources exceed what is available. Resources, such as 
labor, tools, land, and raw materi- als  are  necessary  to  produce  the  goods  and  services  we  want  but  they  
exist  in  limited  supply.  Of course, the ultimate scarce resource is time- everyone, rich or poor, has just 24 hours 
in the day to try to acquire the goods they want. At any point in time, there is only a finite amount of resources 
avail-
able.

Think about it this way: In 2015 the labor force in the United States contained over 158.6 million workers, according 
to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Similarly, the total area of the United States is 3,794,101 square miles. These 
are large numbers for such crucial resources, however, they are lim- ited. Because these resources are limited, so are 
the numbers of goods and services we produce with them. Combine this with the fact that human wants seem to be 
virtually infinite, and you can see why scarcity is a problem.

If you still do not believe that scarcity is a problem, consider the following: Does everyone need food to eat? Does 
everyone need a decent place to live? Does everyone have access to healthcare? In every country in the world, there are 
people who are hungry, homeless (for example, those who call park benches  their  beds,  as  shown  in  Figure  1),  
and  in  need  of  healthcare,  just  to  focus  on  a  few  criti- cal goods and services. Why is this the case? It is 
because of scarcity. Let’s delve into the concept of scarcity a little deeper, because it is crucial to understanding 
economics.

THE PROBLEM OF SCARCITY

Think about all the things you consume: food, shelter, clothing, transportation, healthcare, and enter- tainment. How 
do you acquire those items? You do not produce them yourself. You buy them. How do you afford the things you buy? You 
work for pay. Or if you do not, someone else does on your behalf.

4                       ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 






















Figure  1.  Scarcity  of  Resources.  Homeless  people  are  a  stark reminder    that    scarcity    of    resources   
 is    real.    (Credit:    “dav- eynin”/Flickr Creative Commons)

Yet most of us never have enough to buy all the things we want. This is because of scarcity. So how do we solve it?

Visit this website to read about how the United States is dealing with scarcity in resources.












Every society, at every level, must make choices about how to use its resources. Families must decide whether to spend 
their money on a new car or a fancy vacation. Towns must choose whether to put more of the budget into police and fire 
protection or into the school system. Nations must decide whether to devote more funds to national defense or to 
protecting the environment. In most cases, there just isn’t enough money in the budget to do everything. So why do we 
not each just produce all of the things we consume? The simple answer is most of us do not know how, but that is not 
the main reason. (When you study economics, you will discover that the obvious choice is not always the right answer—or 
at least the complete answer. Studying economics teaches you to think in a different of way.) Think back to pioneer 
days, when individuals knew how to do so much more than we do today, from building their homes, to growing their crops, 
to hunting for food, to repairing their equipment. Most of us do not know how to do all—or any—of those things. It is 
not because we could not learn.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                         5
Rather, we do not have to. The reason why is something called the division and specialization of labor, a production 
innovation first put forth by Adam Smitft, Figure 2, in his book, The Wealth of Nations.



















Figure   2.   Adam   Smith.   Adam Smith    introduced    the    idea    of dividing  labor  into  discrete  tasks. 
(Credit: Wikimedia Commons)

THE DIVISION OF AND SPECIALIZATION OF LABOR
The formal study of economics began when Adam Smith (1723–1790) published his famous book The Wealth of Nations in 
1776. Many authors had written on economics in the centuries before Smith, but he was the first to address the subject 
in a comprehensive way. In the first chapter, Smith introduces the division of labor, which means that the way a good 
or service is produced is divided into a num- ber of tasks that are performed by different workers, instead of all the 
tasks being done by the same person.

To illustrate the division of labor, Smith counted how many tasks went into making a pin: drawing out a piece of wire, 
cutting it to the right length, straightening it, putting a head on one end and a point on the other, and packaging 
pins for sale, to name just a few. Smith counted 18 distinct tasks that were often done by different people—all for a 
pin, believe it or not!

Modern businesses divide tasks as well. Even a relatively simple business like a restaurant divides up the task of 
serving meals into a range of jobs like top chef, sous chefs, less-skilled kitchen help, servers to wait on the tables, 
a greeter at the door, janitors to clean up, and a business manager to handle pay- checks and bills—not to mention the 
economic connections a restaurant has with suppliers of food, furniture, kitchen equipment, and the building where it 
is located. A complex business like a large manufacturing factory, such as the shoe factory shown in Figure 3, or a 
hospital can have hundreds of job classifications.

6                       ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 




















Figure 3.  Division  of  Labor.  Workers  on  an  assembly  line  are  an example of the divisions of labor. (Credit: 
Nina Hale/Flickr Creative Commons)
WHY THE DIVISION OF LABOR INCREASES PRODUCTION

When  the  tasks  involved  with  producing  a  good  or  service  are  divided  and  subdivided,  workers and 
businesses can produce a greater quantity of output. In his observations of pin factories, Smith observed that one 
worker alone might make 20 pins in a day, but that a small business of 10 workers (some of whom would need to do two or 
three of the 18 tasks involved with pin-making), could make 48,000 pins in a day. How can a group of workers, each 
specializing in certain tasks, produce so much more than the same number of workers who try to produce the entire good 
or service by themselves? Smith offered three reasons.
First, specialization in a particular small job allows workers to focus on the parts of the production process  where  
they  have  an  advantage.  (In  later  chapters,  we  will  develop  this  idea  by  discussing comparative 
advantage.) People have different skills, talents, and interests, so they will be better at some jobs than at others. 
The particular advantages may be based on educational choices, which are in turn shaped by interests and talents. Only 
those with medical degrees qualify to become doctors, for instance. For some goods, specialization will be affected by 
geography—it is easier to be a wheat farmer in North Dakota than in Florida, but easier to run a tourist hotel in 
Florida than in North Dakota. If you live in or near a big city, it is easier to attract enough customers to operate a 
successful dry cleaning business or movie theater than if you live in a sparsely populated rural area. Whatever the 
reason, if people specialize in the production of what they do best, they will be more productive than if they produce 
a combination of things, some of which they are good at and some of which they are not.

Second, workers who specialize in certain tasks often learn to produce more quickly and with higher quality. This 
pattern holds true for many workers, including assembly line laborers who build cars, stylists who cut hair, and 
doctors who perform heart surgery. In fact, specialized workers often know their jobs well enough to suggest innovative 
ways to do their work faster and better.

A similar pattern often operates within businesses. In many cases, a business that focuses on one or a

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                         7

few products (sometimes called its “core competency”) is more successful than firms that try to make a wide range of 
products.

Third, specialization allows businesses to take advantage of economies of scale, which means that for many goods, as 
the level of production increases, the average cost of producing each individual unit declines. For example, if a 
factory produces only 100 cars per year, each car will be quite expensive to make on average. However, if a factory 
produces 50,000 cars each year, then it can set up an assem- bly line with huge machines and workers performing 
specialized tasks, and the average cost of pro- duction per car will be lower. The ultimate result of workers who can 
focus on their preferences and talents, learn to do their specialized jobs better, and work in larger organizations is 
that society as a whole can produce and consume far more than if each person tried to produce all of their own goods 
and services. The division and specialization of labor has been a force against the problem of scarcity.

TRADE AND MARKETS

Specialization only makes sense, though, if workers can use the pay they receive for doing their jobs to purchase the 
other goods and services that they need. In short, specialization requires trade.

You do not have to know anything about electronics or sound systems to play music—you just buy an iPod or MP3 player, 
download the music and listen. You do not have to know anything about artificial fibers or the construction of sewing 
machines if you need a jacket—you just buy the jacket and wear it. You do not need to know anything about internal 
combustion engines to operate a car—you just get in and drive. Instead of trying to acquire all the knowledge and 
skills involved in producing all of the goods and services that you wish to consume, the market allows you to learn a 
specialized set of skills and then use the pay you receive to buy the goods and services you need or want. This is how 
our modern society has evolved into a strong economy.

WHY STUDY ECONOMICS?

Now that we have gotten an overview on what economics studies, let’s quickly discuss why you are right to study it. 
Economics is not primarily a collection of facts to be memorized, though there are plenty of important concepts to be 
learned. Instead, economics is better thought of as a collection of questions to be answered or puzzles to be worked 
out. Most important, economics provides the tools to work out those puzzles. If you have yet to be been bitten by the 
economics “bug,” there are other reasons why you should study economics.

•   Virtually every major problem facing the world today, from global warming, to world poverty, to the conflicts in 
Syria, Afghanistan, and Somalia, has an economic dimension. If you are going to be part of solving those problems, you 
need to be able to understand them. Economics is crucial.
•   It is hard to overstate the importance of economics to good citizenship. You need to be able to vote intelligently 
on budgets, regulations, and laws in general. When the U.S. government came close to a standstill at the end of 2012 
due to the “fiscal cliff,” what were the issues involved? Did you know?
•   A basic understanding of economics makes you a well-rounded thinker. When you read articles about economic issues, 
you will understand and be able to evaluate the writer’s argument. When you hear classmates, co-workers, or political 
candidates talking about

8                       ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


economics, you will be able to distinguish between common sense and nonsense. You will find new ways of thinking about 
current events and about personal and business decisions, as well as current events and politics.

The study of economics does not dictate the answers, but it can illuminate the different choices.

KEY CONCEPTS AND SUMMARY

Economics seeks to solve the problem of scarcity, which is when human wants for goods and services exceed the available 
supply. A modern economy displays a division of labor, in which people earn income by specializing in what they produce 
and then use that income to purchase the products they need or want. The division of labor allows individuals and firms 
to specialize and to produce more for several reasons: a) It allows the agents to focus on areas of advantage due to 
natural factors and skill levels; b) It encourages the agents to learn and invent; c) It allows agents to take 
advantage of economies of scale. Division and specialization  of labor only work when individuals can purchase what  
they  do  not  produce  in  markets.  Learning  about  economics  helps  you  understand  the  major problems facing 
the world today, prepares you to be a good citizen, and helps you become a well- rounded thinker.

SELF-CHECK QUESTIONS



1.    What is scarcity? Can you think of two causes of scarcity?
2.    Residents of the town of Smithfield like to consume hams, but each ham requires 10 people to produce it and takes 
a month. If the town has a total of 100 people, what is the maximum amount of ham the residents can consume in a month?
3.    A consultant works for $200 per hour. She likes to eat vegetables, but is not very good at growing them. Why does 
it make more economic sense for her to spend her time at the consulting job and shop for her vegetables?
4.    A computer systems engineer could paint his house, but it makes more sense for him to hire a painter to do it. 
Explain why.



REVIEW QUESTIONS



1.    Give the three reasons that explain why the division of labor increases an economy’s level of production.
2.    What are three reasons to study economics?




CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS



1.    Suppose you have a team of two workers: one is a baker and one is a chef. Explain why the kitchen can produce 
more meals in a given period of time if each worker specializes in what they do best than if each worker tries to do 
everything from appetizer to dessert.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                         9




2.    Why would division of labor without trade not work?
3.    Can you think of any examples of free goods, that is, goods or services that are not scarce?



REFERENCES

Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor. 2015. “The Employment Situation—February 2015.” Accessed March 
27, 2015. http://www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/empsit.pdf.

Williamson, Lisa. “US Labor Market in 2012.” Bureau of Labor Statistics. Accessed December 1, 2013. 
http://www.bls.gov/opub/mlr/2013/03/art1full.pdf.

GLOSSARY
division of labor the way in which the work required to produce a good or service is divided into tasks performed by 
different workers
economics the study of how humans make choices under conditions of scarcity
economies of scale when the average cost of producing each individual unit declines as total output increases
scarcity when human wants for goods and services exceed the available supply
specialization when workers or firms focus on particular tasks for which they are well-suited within the overall 
production process

SOLUTIONS


Answers for Self-Cfteck Questions

1.    Scarcity means human wants for goods and services exceed the available supply. Supply is limited because 
resources are limited. Demand, however, is virtually unlimited. Whatever the supply, it seems human nature to want 
more.
2.    100 people / 10 people per ham = a maximum of 10 hams per month if all residents produce ham. Since consumption 
is limited by production, the maximum number of hams residents could consume per month is 10.
3.    She is very productive at her consulting job, but not very productive growing vegetables. Time spent consulting 
would produce far more income than it what she could save growing her vegetables using the same amount of time. So on 
purely economic grounds, it makes more sense for her to maximize her income by applying her labor to what she does best 
(i.e. specialization of labor).
4.    The engineer is better at computer science than at painting. Thus, his time is better spent w orking for pay at 
his job and paying a painter to paint his house. Of course, this assumes he does not paint his house for fun!
