


CHAPTER 14. THE RISE OF BIG BUSINESS




INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  RISE  OF  BIG  BUSINESS





































Figure  1.  Organizational  diagram  of  the  New  York  and  Erie  Railroad,  1855.  Daniel McCallum & George Holt 
Henshaw. Public Domain.


LEARNING OBJECTIVES


Introduction to tfte Rise of Big Business
In this chapter, you will learn about:

•    Big Business in American History
•    Industrialization and the Factory

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   393



•    Big Business and Organized Labor



s you will see in the next few chapters, heterodox economists take a very different approach to studying the modern 
business enterprise. In contrast to focusing on the neoclassical ideal of relatively small firms in perfectly 
competitive markets, heterodox economists start with the recognition that the modern business enterprise tends to be 
large. We may think of large firms as pos- sessing  differential  advantage  over  their  competitors  and  the  
ability  to  exert  control  over  key moments throughout the production process. Finally, we choose to place big 
business at the center of our economic inquiry, because the large corporation possesses the power to act in ways that 
other agents cannot. In this regard, the Megacorp–as Post Keynesian economist Alfred Eichner call it–may
be viewed as a social actor–that is, one who may act with institutional capacity.

What  do  we  mean  when  we  say  that  some  persons  act  with  institutional  capacity?  It  is  helpful  to return 
briefly to the problem of institutions. In an earlier chapter on consumption we defined insti- tutions as collectively 
shared habits of thought–of knowing, doing, and valuing.  The American insti- tutional economist John R. Commons 
suggests that institutions result in shaping individual behavior by controlling, liberating and expanding individual 
action. Commons’ view of the relational effects that institutions exert on individual action facilitates examination of 
history as a process of cumula- tive causation. We wish to know how individuals interact with society as a whole, and 
how they may affect the systems as a whole in varying degrees of efficacy. And in turn, we wish to know how social 
structures constrain, shape and focus individual action.

It is important that we keep these concepts in mind as we study the history of big business. Without a clear view as to 
how individuals interact with one another and the system as a whole, it is difficult to situate the megacorp in 
history, instead relegating its emergence as one of technical inevitability. With these tools let us proceed with an 
overview of the history of big business.

THE JOINT-STOCK CORPORATION AND LONG DISTANCE TRADE
The modern business enterprise has its roots in the early trade regimes of European nation states dur- ing the 17th and 
18th centuries.

Corporations  like  the  East  India  Company  were  granted  special  privileges  by  the  political  ruling 
establishment  in  order  to  guard  against  the  uncertainties  involved  with  long-distance  trade  –  an 
inherently risky proposition. Such privileges are referred to in economic history as Crown Monop- olies, by reference 
to their relationship with the monarchy. Crown monopolies belong to a class of restrictive trade practices that may be 
considered to be common to all capitalist markets. However, it is important to stress that the actual flavor that such 
market governance mechanisms embody depends upon the historical context in which we examine them. It is useful to draw 
comparisons between the joint-stock corporations that enjoyed crown monopolies, such as the East India Company, and 
mod- ern corporations that benefit from other protections in accordance with modern market governance institutions, but 
we should exercise caution as some modern developments do not fit with early capi- talist institutions.

394                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 





















Figure  2.  Coat  of  Arms  of  the  British  East  India Company. Wikimedia Commons. CC BY-SA 3.0

MERCANTILISM
Mercantilism is a term that economists use to describe a social provisioning process peculiar to West- ern European 
nation-states during the 17th and 18th centuries. Philosophers who thought and wrote about economic ideas believed that 
a strong nation-state was one that was able to accumulate more gold and silver than their contemporaries. Hence, the 
orientation for the economies of these monar- chies was that of external trade. To effect this end, the monarch had to 
enable a fleet of merchant ves- sels that were capable of engaging in long-distance trade, often with costly and 
uncertain outcomes at the end of a long voyage. Merchant vessels and crew are costly endeavors – far beyond the 
capacity of any given individual to finance on a sustainable basis. Therefore, it was necessary to pool the funds of  
many  investors  vested  in  a  single  shipping  enterprise.  But,  capitalists  are  easily  spooked  by  the 
prospect of losses (early, proto-capitalists were no exception) and so the practice of granting special protections and 
privileges to investors pooling funds for shipping concerns facilitated and enabled the investment. It is important to 
note, also, that capitalists vested in joint-stock corporations for the purposes of long-distance trade were not random 
citizens. They were connected via kinship networks to the aristocracy.

Adam Smith’s magnum opus, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations [1776], may be viewed as an 
attack on the political economy of mercantilism. Smith’s critique lies on the theory of value embodied in mercantilism. 
Smith observes that mercantilism was predicated upon a zero sum game. Enriching the welfare of a given nation-state 
meant that another had to lose relative shares of total economic value. Smith argues that production, not trade, was 
the wellspring of value. Produc- tivity, not special privileges to extended members of the aristocracy, should be the 
end in view of any nation wishing to enrich itself. For Smith, productivity is enhanced through a greater elaboration 
of the division of labor and extension of the market in society. Restrictive trade practices only stymied this 
development, Smith believed.

Despite Smith’s protestations market governance institutions that result in creating special privileges for specific 
firms remain a commonplace in capitalist society.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   395






























Figure  3.  Pin  maker’s  factory,  indicating  the  division  of  labor  in  making  a  simple  pin.   Depicted  in 
Diderot’s Encyclopédie, ou Dictionnaire raisonné des sciences, des arts et des métiers 1762: Epinglier, Plate II. This 
image is in the public domain.



14.1  BIG  BUSINESS  IN  AMERICAN  HISTORY



he history of the American experience tends to be viewed as exceptional relative to Europe. The tradition has generally 
been to view the course of American development as unique and sepa- rate from the antecedent European history that 
America originates from. One consequence of
this ideological tradition has been to view corporate power as an anomaly to an otherwise well-func- tioning system, in 
which unfettered market forces generally produce highly competitive, small firms that do not possess effective market 
power. The actual history is quite different.

From the very foundation of the American colonies big business has been the rule, not the exception. The Virginia 
Company, a joint-stock company that enjoyed an exclusive patent on very large swathes of land (see figure 4 below), 
established the first British colony at Jamestown in 1607. A patent is taken here to mean an exclusive grant by the 
sovereign with respect to a particular land tract, and establishes a fundamental claim to ownership and disposal of 
that land.


















Figure 4. Map of the Colony of Virginia — during 17th and early 18th centuries, by Kmusser. CC BY SA 2.5

The managerial class vested with the power of the charter administered all aspects of colonial life. Virtually all of 
the land that makes up the area that is described as the original thirteen colonies was held in ownership by a small 
set of individuals vested with property rights derived from monarchical legal traditions, granted with an exclusive 
patent for private development.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   397

BUSINESS ENTERPRISE AND PROPERTY RIGHTS
The corporate firm and the legal structure of property rights coevolved in the course of US economic history. When we 
examine the going concern with an emphasis on its proprietary relationships with other aspects of the economy this 
codevelopment appears all the more transparent. That is, the firm is the site of a great many transactions in the 
economic system. Monetary transactions in which the firm makes a claim to resources generated in the economy involve 
rules governing the proprietary relationships between the transacting party and the resources in question. In order to 
secure exclu- sive and steady claim to a set of resources the firm must be contractually entitled to the resources as 
private property.  Hence, it is important to study the codevelopment between firms and the legal framework on the 
matter of property.

These transactions provide the foundation for the intangible value of the firm as property. Intangible value emerges as 
the firm is able to maintain differential advantage with respect to other participants in the market, as well as 
maintain control over stages in the production process in which the firm is  engaged,  while  exerting  its  influence  
over  matters  of  market  governance.  Precisely  how  society chooses to assign rights to such property is a matter 
of primary importance from the standpoint of determining the status of vestiture. Hence, insofar as firms embody the 
creation of property and affect existing claims to property, it is necessary to adjust the legal framework to  
establish a coherent sys- tem of property rights. By setting up the problem as essentially a relationship between the 
law and the corporation, we can appreciate the importance of the corporation in the development of American capitalism.

COLONIAL LEGAL INSTITUTIONS
Colonial America borrowed its legal framework from the English common law system. The common law tradition allows for 
judges to freely interpret new laws in light of old ones, suggesting that judges take an active role in shaping the 
subsequent development of legal institutions. This legal tradition of judicial instrumentalism will be important as we 
examine the changing nature of property and the firm.

REAL PROPERTY RIGHTS
The colonists derived their property rights as privileges of the king. Since colonists were subjects of the king, they 
enjoyed all the rights to property that citizens in London enjoyed. The Crown permit- ted the free and common socage 
system of land tenure in the American colonies, as opposed to other land tenure systems that reflected the myriad 
feudal relations and systems of mutual obligation. Free and common socage is described by the following features:

•   Perpetual ownership
•   Transmissible to heirs.
•   Free disposal of property
•   Alienable

The fee simple system, as Americans would come to know it, embodies a set of rights. Property is often thought of as a 
“bundle of rights” for this reason. Accompanying these bundles of rights are a set of rents due the donor of the land, 
the king. Quit rents, then, represent the debt the holder of real property owes to the sovereign for the right to 
remain at liberty with the property. If the land-

398                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 

holder defaults on this obligation by failing to make the quit rent payment, ownership reverts to the sovereign. Modern 
observers may look to a city like Kansas City, Missouri which possesses a large inventory of housing whose landlords 
are not current in their tax liability to the local government. Eventually, the state takes possession of the real 
property and all rights associated with ownership are revoked, until the property is disposed of again as private 
property.

POLICE POWER
One of the principal legal developments in American economic history is that the state holds broad powers to establish  
and define markets, or otherwise exercise its police powers toward some eco- nomic end. This power allows the state to 
establish special privileges to private entities so that it may collect rents by controlling access to resources. For 
example, suppose a local municipality wished to transform a waterfall into a lock & canal system in order to facilitate 
inland navigation via steamship. The state may grant a franchise to a firm for exclusive use of the public right of 
way, thereby entitling the owner of the concern to a rent. Alternatively, the state may attempt to directly develop the 
falls to remove the impediment to navigation. In either case, the extent to which income is transferred from the 
community as a result of the establishment of a lock & canal depends entirely upon the discre- tion of those in control 
of the property, who must decide whether and to what extent they will charge rents. In general, the firm must earn 
revenues from its ongoing marketing activity in order to remain a going concern.

EMERGENCE OF PRIORITY RIGHTS
One peculiarity of English common law was the institution of granting existing property holders pro- tections against a 
future neighbor who may impose costs upon on them in their own pursuits regard- ing their property. The doctrine of 
ancient lights, as it was known, is the underlying concept of the practice of establishing a basis for prescriptive 
rights in common law. This common law principle suggests that the long tenured holders of property rights are protected 
from new developments that would diminish or impede upon their property, in an absolute sense. For example, a property 
holder who enjoys the benefit of, say, unimpeded sunlight would have the reasonable expectation that rival parties  who 
 wish  to  construct  a  home  adjacent  to  their  property  would  not  be  able  to  do  so  if  it resulted in 
blocking such daylight. But, the doctrine of ancient lights was not restricted solely to the issue of sunlight, but 
more broadly as referring to general benefits to property ownership. In effect, the doctrine of ancient lights imputes 
a conservative bias in the course of development in such a way that favors temporal or generation advantage to prior 
property holders.

As  the  American  economy  developed,  this  doctrine  was  tested  in  court  and  found  to  obstruct  the economic  
development  of  urban  areas.  Prescriptive  rights  were  found  to  be  inconsistent  with  the social conditions in 
which American economic development was embedded. In 1838, a case in New York state, Parker v. Foote,  established 
precedent for overturning the institution of prescriptive rights, wherein the judge ruled that the doctrine of ancient 
lights cannot be applied without inhibiting the growth of cities and internal improvements. Hence, the law was adjusted 
by judicial instrumental- ism to accommodate and legitimate negative externalities as a byproduct of economic 
development. When economists refer to negative externalities they are describing costs that impact third parties as a 
result of some economic process not born by the agents principally engaged in such activity.

THE VALIDITY OF CONTRACTS BETWEEN UNEQUALS
Under English contract law, contracts were held as valid only when struck on an equitable basis. That

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   399

contract validity rested upon notions of equity was vestigial to feudal institutions. Contracts were not considered 
valid if they were struck between two parties that were viewed as too unequal. For example, contracts between someone 
of sound mind and one that is mentally impaired would be con- sidered invalid on the premise that the two parties were 
not equal in their contracting ability. It fol- lows that based upon this equity consideration in the common-law 
tradition contracts between, say, a factory owner and an individual laborer would not be valid. In American capitalism, 
such an idea is anachronistic and incompatible with the manner in which value is extracted, appropriated and cap- 
italized. While the equity tradition remained central to American contract law throughout the 18th century, four 
important changes to contract law would emerge in the course of American develop- ment.

First, in the 19th century the courts interpreted contracts struck between free persons without com- pulsions as valid, 
on the principle that mutual assent generally implied validity irrespective of equity. For example, if a factory owner 
made the terms of employment known to the public and workers accepted a labor contract in exchange for wages, then the 
contract is valid whether or not the individ- ual worker stands on equitable terms with her employer. In this 
circumstance equity refers to the bal- ance of bargaining power between parties in transaction with each other. It 
would be absurd to think that a factory owner possesses the same bargaining power as an individual worker, for the 
owner con- trols and exercises their discretion over the the production process. Despite this lack of equity, the labor 
contract is considered valid so long as the worker knows in advance what she signing up for.

Second, the rule embodied above, that of mutual assent or “meeting of the wills” as it is referred to in contract law, 
applied to transactions in markets. Provided the buyer is free to inspect the quality of the goods, then any asymmetry 
of knowledge regarding its quality or serviceability does not impair the validity of the contract in exchange.

Third, contracts were struck in terms of market prices, as opposed to customary prices that ensure equity through time. 
That is to say, if the prices of the goods changed from the time the contract is struck and the buyer takes delivery, 
then the contracted price remains valid. This institutional change facilitated the development of futures contracts. A 
futures contract is nothing more than a promise to pay at a later date for delivery of some good, where the contracted 
price is settled in current market prices. The following breakout box provides a simply example to illustrate how they 
work.


HOW FUTURES CONTRACTS WORK

Suppose I am in the wheat milling business. I know that I need 100 bushels of wheat so that I can mill all of the meal 
I expect to sell next month. I have a feeling that next month the price of wheat is going to increase, so I decide to 
lock in today’s prices on the wheat that I’ll receive next month. I can do this by buying a futures contract from a 
wheat farmer for delivery of  her wheat in a month, but at today’s price.

Futures contracts are the foundation of a whole class of financial instruments called options, which are ubiquitous in 
mod- ern American capitalism as they are used to provide risk hedging positions for firms that have an interest in the 
commodi- ties that undergird the futures contract in question. They are also a means of speculating in financial 
markets, but that is a topic we shall avoid for now. The main point to remember here, is that changing from customary 
to market prices in contract law opened up space for the financialized firm to thrive and grow, essential to the 
development of the modern corporation.

400                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 




Fourth, the courts began to interpret contract law such that employer liability for hazards incurred by workers was 
limited. The presumption that, with the principle of mutual assent, dangers and risks associated with the workplace 
were encapsulated in the wage, implied that workers that agreed to the  terms  of  employment  absolved  employers’  
liability  of  injury.  Additionally,  the  “fellow  servant doctrine” suggested  that employers were further limited 
in liability where injuries to an employee resulted from negligence on the part of his coworkers. Given the nature of 
production, it is common to expect that contributory negligence plays some part in the hazards, making it difficult for 
workers to establish negligence and liability on the part of their employer.

THE SUPREME COURT
Since John Marshall’s tenure as Chief Justice (1801- 1835), the Supreme Court has exercised consid- erable power in the 
shaping of American economic legal institutions. In the 1819 case McCullough v. Maryland, Chief Justice Marshall 
established the implied powers of the court in engaging in judicial review and revision of the legal framework as the 
court sees fit. The basic premise was that the con- stitution was intended to be robust through the ages to changes in 
the technical and social character of the nation. Accordingly, the court reserved the right and asserted its power to 
interpret its scope broadly; subsequent rulings would be made in light of new economic and social developments, while 
preserving the legitimacy of the constitution. In McCullough v. Maryland, the constitutional legitimacy of the Second 
Bank of the United States was under question. Marshall ruled that since the bank was chartered with the purpose of 
effecting the ends of the constitution itself, namely regulation of inter- state commerce, then it was legitimate 
despite no specific provision in the constitution for a central bank.

Several antebellum cases before the Supreme Court helped establish the power of the federal govern- ment to regulate 
interstate commerce via the Commerce Clause of the Constitution, superseding state and local desires for the same. In 
Gibbons v. Ogden (1824), the court overturned a monopoly granted by the state of New York to a steamship concern 
because its business involved traffic in New Jer- sey, ruling that individual states do not have the authority to 
regulate interstate commerce. While the powers of the port of Philadelphia were upheld in the service of regulating 
commerce for its munic- ipal needs, Chief Justice Taney in Cooley v. Board of Wardens (1851) held that where such 
regulation touched upon issues of national importance, particularly involving its seaport, those regulatory pow- ers 
were reserved for Congress. Brown v. Maryland (1827) ruled that no state had the power to license and tax importers.

While the Supreme Court was laying the foundation for federal regulation of business enterprise, the immediate impact 
following Gibbons v. Ogden was the liberation of private corporations from state regulation. Not until 1887 with the 
establishment of the Interstate Commerce Commission, which emerged in response to problems associated with market 
governance in railroads, did the federal gov- ernment assert itself on matters of regulation. As a consequence, 
corporations were free to grow and pursue national markets without the interference of local intervention.

Recall,  this  discussion  of  the  history  of  changing  legal  institutions  is  in  regards  to  the  proprietary 
nature of corporations. Perhaps the most important case governing the subsequent development of the legal foundations 
of corporate property and futurity in America economic is Dartmouth College
v.  Woodward (1819). Again, Justice Marshall plays a pivotal role in the coevolution of property law

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   401

and corporations. The direct issue at stake was the legitimacy of Dartmouth’s corporate charter as it rested upon a 
grant from King George III, prior to the establishment of the United States. Indirectly, all patents granted by the 
King prior to the revolution were called into question if the court ruled the proprietary basis for Dartmouth’s charter 
to be invalid following the American Revolution. Mar- shall ruled that revolutions do not inherently undermine vested 
property rights. This granted legiti- macy by judicial review to all original patents by the King, including the 
original Virginia Company patent, which accounted for a considerable portion of all land in the United State. Nearly 
all of the areas affected by the Northwest Ordinances were derived from the original crown patents, suggesting that 
overturning the Dartmouth charter could undermine the legitimacy of all American real prop- erty rights.

CANALS, STEAMBOATS AND RAILROADS
The canalization of the America’s inland waterways, a period spanning 1815 – 1843, marks an impor- tant moment in the 
development of the corporation. Particularly, the canal building era laid the foun- dations for a newfound importance 
for corporations and the ability for private citizens to control the development of the social provisioning process. In 
short, society’s relationship with corporations changed as it used them as institutions for the development of 
large-scale public works projects.

As the US grew westward, institutions were established to facilitate inter-regional trade, and bring to eastern markets 
the product of the hinterland. State governments issued franchises to concerns that incorporated on the premise that 
they would improve waterways in the interior watersheds of the nation. In return, the corporation was entitled to 
revenues associated with control over the canals. Similarly, firms were incorporated to engage in inland navigation 
along the canalized waterways and establish rates sufficient to cover their costs and in accordance with the principle 
of charging what the market may bear. That is to say, firms set prices and administer them to the market, allowing the 
firm to capture quasi-rents and accumulate monetary claims on its balance sheet. Firms are limited in the extent to 
which such rents may be appropriated from the public, which includes factors such as the ability to pay from 
participants in the market as well as rules, formal and informal, that may provide a governance structure to the 
market. For instance, an association may exist between navigation con- cerns that facilitate the orderly division of 
the market, which may impose limits on the pricing dis- cretion of its members. In other situations, the market may be 
divided between firms with different cost structures. In the event that the firms with lowest cost structure 
establishes a market price, less efficient firms will be limited in their ability to capture quasi-rents from the 
public due to pressure to retain market share.

The enterprises that were incorporated for the purposes of building and operating the canals were large. The 
engineering challenges before them required the organizational capacity to administer the provisioning of resources and 
labor that spanned whole regions. The firm was faced with planning challenges that exceeded the scope and capacity of 
small-scale proprietors. Consequently, most enter- prises engaged in the canal business were cooperative ventures 
between private interests and the state. Private interests included merchants who wished to lower transport costs and 
grow the market for their trade, capitalists vested in navigation companies, as well as land speculators, who believed 
that improvements following canalization of waterways would increase the salable value of land held adja- cent to the 
improvement. The state became the financial partner in the venture, providing institu- tional means for generating  
revenue through tax levies and bond issues, and remaining ultimately responsible  for  financing  its  ongoing  
maintenance.  Notably,  the  Erie  Canal,  constructed  between 1817 and 1825, was a landmark achievement of the 
cooperation between private interests and the

402                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 

State of New York toward the end of transforming economic relationships, such that corporations become a central site 
of social provisioning in the development of the American economy.















Figure 5. Workers operating a lock at Lockport, New York ca. 1839 along the Erie Canal. Engraving by W.
H. Bartlett. Public Domain.

To better understand how large scale public works projects, like the Erie Canal, were so transforma- tive consider the 
financial and organizational implications of its development. First, the Erie Canal was financed largely through the 
issuance of bonds. Such bonds were held as wealth by private citi- zens who became vested in the interests of the canal 
as a going concern. To remain a going concern, the  canal  required  the  establishment  of  rates  sufficient  to  
cover  its  costs  as  well  as  sufficient  traf- fic to provide revenues to support its financial liabilities. As a 
result, those financially vested in the canal as bondholders were compelled to take an interest in the development of 
the economic space as a whole such that the canal remained viable, to include promotion of settlement in regions adja- 
cent to the canal and its feeder lines. The grandness of the venture required a further elaboration of the large-scale, 
economic interdependence in which national markets became increasingly important. Second, given the extent of private, 
monied interests vested in the canal, an administrative structure was required in order to ensure the orderly operation 
of the canal and its finances. In the case of the Erie Canal, such an administrative framework was established by 
legislature and structured as a com- mission, whose leadership were drawn from the business communities affected by the 
existence of the canal.

As America’s inland waterways were improved through lock and canal systems, the steamship became increasingly important 
to the social provisioning process. For some communities, navigation com- panies engaged in the steamer trade emerged 
as its first large, powerful corporations. For example, consider the Oregon Steam Navigation Company (OSN) whose 
business was centered in Portland, Oregon in the mid to late 19th century. While small compared to East Coast 
metropoles, Portland was the most important city on the West Coast after San Francisco, until the 1890s when Seattle 
was connected  with  the  transcontinental  rail  system  via  the  Northern  Pacific.  The  OSN  was  Oregon’s first, 
great monopoly whose intangible value provided the basis for wealth for many of the region’s “founding fathers.” The 
intangible value of the corporation lied in:

1.   the the exclusive rights of way that the firm enjoyed in Portland
2.   ownership and control over key portages along the Columbia River, and

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   403

3.   access to the state legislature via the social networks of its owners and agents.

In 1866 efforts to extend a regional trunk of the nascent transcontinental railway system into Port- land from the 
Sacramento Valley in California involved courting the owners of the Oregon Steamship Navigation Company (OSN) on the 
presumption that their political connections would ensure special acts of incorporation from the Oregon legislature 
favorable to the Californian interests. Initially, such owners attempted to block the advance of the railroad promoters 
for threat of the viability of the going business of the OSN. However, later that year, perhaps hedging against the 
threat of eventual encroachment on their business, members of the OSN leadership sought to secure the franchise for the 
Oregon section of the regional trunk of the transcontinental, thereby securing associated land grants and privileges 
from the state, which set off a race between two competing concerns to build a railroad through the Willamette Valley 
in Oregon that would connect Portland with a road from Cal- ifornia. The ultimate objective lied in establishing 
legitimate claim to the exclusive charter, ostensibly by demonstrating commitment to actually build the road and 
fulfill the spirit of the charter, while undermining the legitimacy of the rival concern through the courts and in the 
public mind through influence of the press. The outcome was mutual insolvency between the two parties, who had each 
incorporated variants on the name Oregon Central Railroad.

In the late 1860s, the stagecoach magnate Ben Holladay resolved the conflict by purchasing control of one of the firms, 
persuading the legislature to reassign the charter to the concern he had acquired, and acquiring controlling stake in 
his rivals. Holladay reorganized his newly acquired railway assets under a new name, California & Oregon Railroad, 
together with some steamship ventures that he had estab- lished or acquired in order to provide a revenue source while 
he developed his railway aspirations. To finance this consolidation scheme Holladay floated a considerable amount of 
bonds to counter- parties in Europe, who were falsely led to believe that the market in the Willamette Valley in Oregon 
was capable of supporting the revenue requirements of his steamship and railway concerns. The bal- ance sheet of the 
Oregon and California Railroad relied upon lines of credit extended from specula- tive financiers to remain solvent.

The Panic of 1873 undermined the solvency of the Oregon and California, as Holladay did not earn enough through 
revenues from his properties to service his debt obligations without the ability to issue new debt to refinance old. 
During a financial panic, creditors tend to stop lending, preferring instead to hold more liquid assets on their 
balance sheet for fear of becoming insolvent themselves, resulting in a vicious cycle of asset value deflation. The 
response by Holladay’s creditor’s was to install an  agent  to  take  receivership  of  Holladay’s  properties  and  
reorganize  his  properties  on  a  sounder basis. The surest way to achieve this end was to buy out Holladay’s 
interests, thereby preventing him from exerting any control over the enterprises.

Over the next decade, Henry Villard, agent for German bondholders would proceed to establish new market governance 
institutions in the Pacific Northwest such that economic activity adjacent to the railroads would be harmonized or 
rationalized, with the ultimate end of servicing the debt obliga- tions to foreign creditors. Villard’s aspirations 
were grander than the German bondholders: Villard wanted to engage in thoroughgoing economic development and population 
growth. Villard wanted to build an empire on the Columbia River. A central problem facing Villard was maintaining 
control over the market for railroad traffic in the face of the encroaching Northern Pacific, the main north- ern line 
of the transcontinental system. The directors of the Northern Pacific wanted to run the line to Tacoma or Seattle, 
where the natural deepwater harbors would facilitate better access to interna- tional markets. Yet, Villard was vested 
in properties centered on Portland and its hinterlands. Villard

404                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 

organized a holding company in 1879, the Oregon Railway & Navigation Company, that consolidated his railroads and 
steamships in the Willamette with his acquisition of controlling stake in the OSN. Initially, Villard sought order in 
the market along the Columbia River via traffic sharing agreements with the directors of the Northern Pacific. However, 
the Northern Pacific was determined to build toward the Puget Sound. In order to protect the intangible value embodied 
in the corporations that he had come to control, he engineered a financial takeover of the Northern Pacific, through 
the use of another holding company, the Oregon and Transcontinental Company incorporated in 1881, which allowed Villard 
to pool funds to acquire control in the Northern Pacific. Once in control of the North- ern Pacific, Villard connected 
the Northern Pacific with the Oregon Railway and Navigation Com- pany, ensuring that any traffic destined for the 
Pacific would pass through Portland.

It is important to note that holding companies are essentially financial corporations chartered for the purpose of 
acquiring  majority ownership in another corporation, with a minimum outlay of cash. Holding companies can be layered, 
such that several holding companies stand between a given set of capitalists and the actual underlying corporations 
that the holding companies are designed to facil- itate control. This can be illustrated with a simple example: suppose 
that a simple majority of stock ownership is sufficient to control a railroad corporation. If there are 200 shares of 
stock outstand- ing in the corporation, then it would be necessary to acquire 101 shares to ensure control. Now, sup- 
pose that a holding company can be incorporated and capitalized by issuing 101 shares of stocks and assuming parity 
value between the two stocks. If the holding company is sufficiently capitalized and has access to credit, it is 
possible that by owning a simple majority in the holding company allows one to effectively control the first 
corporation if the holding company is able to acquire a simple major- ity of its stock, for half the ownership 
requirement (see Figure 5 below). With each layer of holding companies between the capitalist and the firm he wishes to 
control, the ownership stake required for control is halved. In this way, great corporations may be brought under 
control of a single individual with relatively little personal outlay involved. This has been a common theme in the 
area of corporate control since the second half of the 19th century, and continued well into the 20th century.


















Figure 6.
