


CHAPTER 11. PERFECT COMPETITION




INTRODUCTION  TO  PERFECT  COMPETITION































Figure 1. Depending upon the competition and prices offered, a wheat farmer may choose to grow a different crop. 
(Credit: modification of work by Daniel X. O’Neil/Flickr Creative Commons)


A DIME A DOZEN

When you were younger did you babysit, deliver papers, or mow the lawn for money? If so, you faced stiff competition 
from a lot of other competitors who offered identical services. There was nothing to stop others from offering their 
ser- vices too.
All of you charged the “going rate.” If you tried to charge more, your customers would simply buy from someone else. 
These conditions are very similar to the conditions agricultural growers face.
Growing a crop may be more difficult to start than a babysitting or lawn mowing service, but growers face the same 
fierce competition. In the grand scale of world agriculture, farmers face competition from thousands of others because 
they sell an identical product. After all, winter wheat is winter wheat. But it is relatively easy for farmers to leave 
the marketplace for another crop. In this case, they do not sell the family farm, they switch crops.
Take the case of the upper Midwest region of the United States—for many generations the area was called “King Wheat.”

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   305



According to the United States Department of Agriculture National Agricultural Statistics Service, statistics by state, 
in 1997, 11.6 million acres of wheat and 780,000 acres of corn were planted in North Dakota. In the intervening 15 or 
so years has the mix of crops changed? Since it is relatively easy to switch crops, did farmers change what was planted 
as the relative crop prices changed? We will find out at chapter’s end.
In the meantime, let’s consider the topic of this chapter—the perfectly competitive market. This is a market in which 
entry and exit are relatively easy and competitors are “a dime a dozen.”


CHAPTER OBJECTIVES



Introduction to Perfect Competition
In this chapter, you will learn about:

•    Perfect Competition and Why It Matters

•    How Perfectly Competitive Firms Make Output Decisions

•    Entry and Exit Decisions in the Long Run

•    Efficiency in Perfectly Competitive Markets



ll businesses face two realities: no one is required to buy their products, and even customers who might want those 
products may buy from other businesses instead. Firms that operate in perfectly competitive markets face this reality. 
In this chapter, you will learn how such firms
make decisions about how much to produce, how much profit they make, whether to stay in business or not, and many 
others. Industries differ from one another in terms of how many sellers there are in a specific market, how easy or 
difficult it is for a new firm to enter, and the type of products that are sold. This is referred to as the market 
structure of the industry. In this chapter, we focus on perfect competition.  However,  in  other  chapters  we  will  
examine  other  industry  types:  Monopoly  and Monopolistic Competition and Oligopoly.



11.1  PERFECT  COMPETITION  AND  WHY  IT  MATTERS



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Explain the characteristics of a perfectly competitive market

•    Discuss how perfectly competitive firms react in the short run and in the long run



irms are said to be in perfect competition when the following conditions occur: (1) many firms produce identical 
products; (2) many buyers are available to buy the product, and many sellers are available  to sell the product; (3) 
sellers  and buyers have all relevant information to make
rational decisions about the product being bought and sold; and (4) firms can enter and leave the mar- ket without any 
restrictions—in other words, there is free entry and exit into and out of the market.

A perfectly competitive firm is known as a price taker, because the pressure of competing firms forces them to accept 
the prevailing equilibrium price in the market. If a firm in a perfectly competi- tive market raises the price of its 
product by so much as a penny, it will lose all of its sales to competi- tors. When a wheat grower, as discussed in the 
Bring it Home feature, wants to know what the going price of wheat is, he or she has to go to the computer or listen to 
the radio to check. The market price is determined solely by supply and demand in the entire market and not the 
individual farmer. Also, a perfectly competitive firm must be a very small player in the overall market, so that it can 
increase or decrease output without noticeably affecting the overall quantity supplied and price in the market.

A perfectly competitive market is a hypothetical extreme; however, producers in a number of indus- tries do face many 
competitor firms selling highly similar goods, in which case they must often act as price takers. Agricultural markets 
are often used as an example. The same crops grown by differ- ent farmers are largely interchangeable. According to the 
United States Department of Agriculture monthly reports, in 2015, U.S. corn farmers received an average price of $6.00 
per bushel and wheat farmers received an average price of $6.00 per bushel. A corn farmer who attempted to sell at 
$7.00 per bushel, or a wheat grower who attempted to sell for $8.00 per bushel, would not have found any buyers. A 
perfectly competitive firm will not sell below the equilibrium price either. Why should they when they can sell all 
they want at the higher price? Other examples of agricultural markets that oper- ate in close to perfectly competitive 
markets are small roadside produce markets and small organic farmers.

Visit this website that reveals the current value of various commodities.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   307









This chapter examines how profit-seeking firms decide how much to produce in perfectly compet- itive markets. Such 
firms will analyze their costs as discussed in the chapter on Cost and Industry Structure. In the short run, the 
perfectly competitive firm will seek the quantity of output where prof- its are highest or, if profits are not 
possible, where losses are lowest. In this example, the “short run” refers to a situation in which firms are producing 
with one fixed input and incur fixed costs of pro- duction. (In the real world, firms can have many fixed inputs.)

In the long run, perfectly competitive firms will react to profits by increasing production. They will respond to 
losses by reducing production or exiting the market. Ultimately, a long-run equilibrium will be attained when no new 
firms want to enter the market and existing firms do not want to leave the market, as economic profits have been driven 
down to zero.

KEY CONCEPTS AND SUMMARY

A perfectly competitive firm is a price taker, which means that it must accept the equilibrium price at which it sells 
goods. If a perfectly competitive firm attempts to charge even a tiny amount more than the market price, it will be 
unable to make any sales. In a perfectly competitive market there are thou- sands of sellers, easy entry, and identical 
products. A short-run production period is when firms are producing with some fixed inputs. Long-run equilibrium in a 
perfectly competitive industry occurs after all firms have entered and exited the industry and seller profits are 
driven to zero.

Perfect competition means that there are many sellers, there is easy entry and exiting of firms, prod- ucts are 
identical from one seller to another, and sellers are price takers.

SELF-CHECK QUESTIONS



1.    Firms in a perfectly competitive market are said to be “price takers”—that is, once the market determines an 
equilibrium price for the product, firms must accept this price. If you sell a product in a perfectly competitive 
market, but you are not happy with its price, would you raise the price, even by a cent?
2.    Would independent trucking fit the characteristics of a perfectly competitive industry?




REVIEW QUESTIONS



1.    A single firm in a perfectly competitive market is relatively small compared to the rest of the market. What does 
this mean? How “small” is “small”?

308                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 



2.    What are the four basic assumptions of perfect competition? Explain in words what they imply for a perfectly 
competitive firm.
3.    What is a “price taker” firm?




CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS



1.    Finding a life partner is a complicated process that may take many years. It is hard to think of this process as 
being part of a very complex market, with a demand and a supply for partners. Think about how this market works and 
some of its characteristics, such as search costs. Would you consider it a perfectly competitive market?
2.    Can you name five examples of perfectly competitive markets? Why or why not?



GLOSSARY

market structure the conditions in an industry, such as number of sellers, how easy or difficult it is for a new firm 
to enter, and the type of products that are sold
perfect competition each firm faces many competitors that sell identical products
price taker a firm in a perfectly competitive market that must take the prevailing market price as given

SOLUTIONS



Answers to Self-Cfteck Questions

1.    No, you would not raise the price. Your product is exactly the same as the product of the many other firms in the 
market. If your price is greater than that of your competitors, then your customers would switch to them and stop 
buying from you. You would lose all your sales.
2.    Possibly. Independent truckers are by definition small and numerous. All that is required to get into the 
business is a truck (not an inexpensive asset, though) and a commercial driver’s license. To exit, one need only sell 
the truck. All trucks are essentially the same, providing transportation from point A to point B. (We’re assuming we 
not talking about specialized trucks.) Independent truckers must take the going rate for their service, so independent 
trucking does seem to have most of the characteristics of perfect competition.
