


CHAPTER 5. LABOR AND FINANCIAL MARKETS




INTRODUCTION  TO  LABOR  AND  FINANCIAL  MARKETS
































Figure 1. People often think of demand and supply in relation to goods, but labor markets, such as the nursing 
profession,  can  also  apply  to  this  analysis.  (Credit:  modification  of  work  by  “Fotos  GOVBA”/Flickr  
Creative Commons)


BABY BOOMERS COME OF AGE

The Census Bureau reports that as of 2013, 20% of the U.S. population was over 60 years old, which means that almost 63 
million people are reaching an age when they will need increased medical care.
The baby boomer population, the group born between 1946 and 1964, is comprised of approximately 74 million people who 
have just reached retirement age. As this population grows older, they will be faced with common healthcare issues such 
as heart conditions, arthritis, and Alzheimer’s that may require hospitalization, long-term, or at-home nursing care. 
Aging baby boomers and advances in life-saving and life-extending technologies will increase the demand for healthcare 
and nursing. Additionally, the Affordable Care Act, which expands access to healthcare for millions of Americans, will 
fur- ther increase the demand.
According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, registered nursing jobs are expected to increase by 19% between 2012 and

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   129



2022. The median annual wage of $67,930 (in 2012) is also expected to increase. The BLS forecasts that 526,000 new 
nurses will be needed by 2022. One concern is the low rate of enrollment in nursing programs to help meet the growing 
demand. According to the American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN), enrollment in 2011 increased by only 5.1% 
due to a shortage of nursing educators and teaching facilities.
These data tell us, as economists, that the market for healthcare professionals, and nurses in particular, will face 
several challenges. Our study of supply and demand will help us to analyze what might happen in the labor market for 
nursing and other healthcare professionals, as discussed in the second half of this case at the end of the chapter.


CHAPTER OBJECTIVES


Introduction to Labor and Financial Markets
In this chapter, you will learn about:

•    Demand and Supply at Work in Labor Markets

•    Demand and Supply in Financial Markets

•    The Market System as an Efficient Mechanism for Information



he theories of supply and demand do not apply just to markets for goods. They apply to any market, even markets for 
labor and financial services. Labor markets are markets for employees or jobs. Financial services markets are markets 
for saving or borrowing.

When we think about demand and supply curves in goods and services markets, it is easy to picture who the demanders and 
suppliers are: businesses produce the products and households buy them. Who are the demanders and suppliers in labor 
and financial service markets? In labor markets job seekers (individuals) are the suppliers of labor, while firms and 
other employers who hire labor are the demanders for labor. In financial markets, any individual or firm who saves 
contributes to the supply of money, and any who borrows (person, firm, or government) contributes to the demand for 
money.

As a college student, you most likely participate in both labor and financial markets. Employment is a fact of life for 
most college students: In 2011, says the BLS, 52% of undergraduates worked part time and another 20% worked full time. 
Most college students are also heavily involved in financial mar- kets, primarily as borrowers. Among full-time 
students, about half take out a loan to help finance their education each year, and those loans average about $6,000 
per year. Many students also borrow for other expenses, like purchasing a car. As this chapter will illustrate, we can 
analyze labor markets and financial markets with the same tools we use to analyze demand and supply in the goods 
markets.



5.1  DEMAND  AND  SUPPLY  AT  WORK  IN  LABOR  MARKETS



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Predict shifts in the demand and supply curves of the labor market

•    Explain the impact of new technology on the demand and supply curves of the labor market

•    Explain price floors in the labor market such as minimum wage or a living wage



arkets  for  labor  have  demand  and  supply  curves,  just  like  markets  for  goods.  The  law  of demand applies 
in labor markets this way: A higher salary or wage—that is, a higher price in the labor market—leads to a decrease in 
the quantity of labor demanded by employers,
while a lower salary or wage leads to an increase in the quantity of labor demanded. The law of supply functions in 
labor markets, too: A higher price for labor leads to a higher quantity of labor supplied; a lower price leads to a 
lower quantity supplied.

EQUILIBRIUM IN THE LABOR MARKET

In  2013,  about  34,000  registered  nurses  worked  in  the  Minneapolis-St.  Paul-Bloomington,  Min- 
nesota-Wisconsin metropolitan area, according to the BLS. They worked for a variety of employers: hospitals, doctors’ 
offices, schools, health clinics, and nursing homes. Figure 1 illustrates how demand and supply determine equilibrium 
in this labor market. The demand and supply schedules in Table 1 list the quantity supplied and quantity demanded of 
nurses at different salaries.

Annual Salary             Quantity Demanded                Quantity Supplied
$55,000                          45,000                                            20,000
$60,000                          40,000                                            27,000
$65,000                          37,000                                            31,000
$70,000                          34,000                                            34,000
$75,000                          33,000                                            38,000
$80,000                          32,000                                            41,000
Table 1. Demand and Supply of Nurses in Minneapolis-St. Paul-Bloomington

The horizontal axis shows the quantity of nurses hired. In this example, labor is measured by number of workers, but 
another common way to measure the quantity of labor is by the number of hours

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   131





















Figure 1. Labor Market Example: Demand and Supply for Nurses in Minneapolis-St. Paul-Bloomington. The demand curve (D) 
of those employers who want to hire nurses intersects with the supply curve (S) of those who are qualified and willing 
to work as nurses at the equilibrium  point (E). The equilibrium  salary is $70,000 and the equi- librium quantity  is 
34,000  nurses. At an above-equilibrium  salary of $75,000,  quan- tity supplied increases to 38,000, but the quantity 
of nurses demanded at the higher pay declines to 33,000. At this above-equilibrium salary, an excess supply or surplus 
of  nurses  would  exist.  At  a  below-equilibrium  salary  of  $60,000,  quantity  supplied declines to 27,000, while 
the quantity demanded at the lower wage increases to 40,000 nurses. At this below-equilibrium salary, excess demand or 
a surplus exists.

worked. The vertical axis shows the price for nurses’ labor—that is, how much they are paid. In the real world, this 
“price” would be total labor compensation: salary plus benefits. It is not obvious, but benefits are a significant part 
(as high as 30 percent) of labor compensation. In this example, the price of labor is measured by salary on an annual 
basis, although in other cases the price of labor could be measured by monthly or weekly pay, or even the wage paid per 
hour. As the salary for nurses rises, the quantity demanded will fall. Some hospitals and nursing homes may cut back on 
the number of nurses they  hire,  or  they  may  lay  off  some  of  their  existing  nurses,  rather  than  pay  them  
higher  salaries. Employers who face higher nurses’ salaries may also try to replace some nursing functions by invest- 
ing in physical equipment, like computer monitoring and diagnostic systems to monitor patients, or by using lower-paid 
health care aides to reduce the number of nurses they need.

As the salary  for nurses  rises,  the quantity  supplied will rise.  If nurses’  salaries  in Minneapolis-St. 
Paul-Bloomington are higher than in other cities, more nurses will move to Minneapolis-St. Paul- Bloomington to find 
jobs, more people will be willing to train as nurses, and those currently trained as nurses will be more likely to 
pursue nursing as a full-time job. In other words, there will be more nurses looking for jobs in the area.
At equilibrium, the quantity supplied and the quantity demanded are equal. Thus, every employer who wants to hire a 
nurse at this equilibrium wage can find a willing worker, and every nurse who wants to work at this equilibrium salary 
can find a job. In Figure 1, the supply curve (S) and demand

132                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


curve (D) intersect at the equilibrium point (E). The equilibrium quantity of nurses in the Minneapo- lis-St. 
Paul-Bloomington area is 34,000, and the equilibrium salary is $70,000 per year. This example simplifies the nursing 
market by focusing on the “average” nurse. In reality, of course, the market for nurses is actually made up of many 
smaller markets, like markets for nurses with varying degrees of experience and credentials. Many markets contain 
closely related products that differ in quality; for instance, even a simple product like gasoline comes in regular, 
premium, and super-premium, each with a different price. Even in such cases, discussing the average price of gasoline, 
like the average salary for nurses, can still be useful because it reflects what is happening in most of the 
submarkets.

When the price of labor is not at the equilibrium, economic incentives tend to move salaries toward the equilibrium. 
For example, if salaries for nurses in Minneapolis-St. Paul-Bloomington were above the equilibrium at $75,000 per year, 
then 38,000 people want to work as nurses, but employers want to hire only 33,000 nurses. At that above-equilibrium 
salary, excess supply or a surplus results. In a situation of excess supply in the labor market, with many applicants 
for every job opening, employers will have an incentive to offer lower wages than they otherwise would have. Nurses’ 
salary will move down toward equilibrium.

In contrast, if the salary is below the equilibrium at, say, $60,000 per year, then a situation of excess demand or a 
shortage arises. In this case, employers encouraged by the relatively lower wage want to hire 40,000 nurses, but only 
27,000 individuals want to work as nurses at that salary in Minneapolis- St. Paul-Bloomington. In response to the 
shortage, some employers will offer higher pay to attract the nurses. Other employers will have to match the higher pay 
to keep their own employees. The higher salaries will encourage more nurses to train or work in Minneapolis-St. 
Paul-Bloomington. Again, price and quantity in the labor market will move toward equilibrium.

SHIFTS IN LABOR DEMAND

The demand curve for labor shows the quantity of labor employers wish to hire at any given salary or wage rate, under 
the ceteris paribus assumption. A change in the wage or salary will result in a change in  the  quantity  demanded  of  
labor.  If  the  wage  rate  increases,  employers  will  want  to  hire  fewer employees.  The  quantity  of  labor  
demanded  will  decrease,  and  there  will  be  a  movement  upward along the demand curve. If the wages and salaries 
decrease, employers are more likely to hire a greater number of workers. The quantity of labor demanded will increase, 
resulting in a downward move- ment along the demand curve.

Shifts in the demand curve for labor occur for many reasons. One key reason is that the demand for labor is based on 
the demand for the good or service that is being produced. For example, the more new automobiles  consumers demand, the 
greater  the number  of workers automakers will need to hire. Therefore the demand for labor is called a “derived 
demand.” Here are some examples of derived demand for labor:

•   The demand for chefs is dependent on the demand for restaurant meals.
•   The demand for pharmacists is dependent on the demand for prescription drugs.
•   The demand for attorneys is dependent on the demand for legal services.

As the demand for the goods and services increases, the demand for labor will increase, or shift to the right,  to meet 
employers’  production requirements.  As the demand for the goods  and services

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   133
decreases, the demand for labor will decrease, or shift to the left. Table 2 shows that in addition to the derived 
demand for labor, demand can also increase or decrease (shift) in response to several factors.
Factors             Results

Demand for Output

Education and Training





Technology





Number of Companies


Government Regulations



Price and Availability of Other Inputs
When the demand for the good produced (output) increases, both the output price and profitability increase. As a 
result, producers demand more labor to ramp up production.
A well-trained and educated workforce causes an increase in the demand for that labor by employers. Increased levels of 
productivity within the workforce will cause the demand for labor to shift to the right. If the workforce is not 
well-trained or educated, employers will not hire from within that labor pool, since they will need to spend a 
significant amount of time and money training that workforce. Demand for such will shift to the left.
Technology changes can act as either substitutes for or complements to labor. When technology acts as a substitute, it 
replaces the need for the number of workers an employer needs to hire. For example, word processing decreased the 
number of typists needed in the workplace. This shifted the demand curve for typists left. An increase in the 
availability of certain technologies may increase the demand for labor.
Technology that acts as a complement to labor will increase the demand for certain types of labor, resulting in a 
rightward shift of the demand curve. For example, the increased use of word processing and other software has increased 
the demand for information technology professionals who can resolve software and hardware issues related to a firm’s 
network. More and better technology will increase demand for skilled workers who know how to use technology to enhance 
workplace productivity. Those workers who do not adapt to changes in technology will experience a decrease in demand.
An increase in the number of companies producing a given product will increase the demand for labor resulting in a 
shift to the right. A decrease in the number of companies producing a given product will decrease the demand for labor 
resulting in a shift to the left.
Complying with government regulations can increase or decrease the demand for labor at any given wage. In the 
healthcare industry, government rules may require that nurses be hired to carry out certain medical procedures. This 
will increase the demand for nurses. Less-trained healthcare workers would be prohibited from carrying out these 
procedures, and the demand for these workers will shift to the left.
Labor is not the only input into the production process. For example, a salesperson at a call center needs a telephone 
and a computer terminal to enter data and record sales. The demand for salespersons at the call center will increase if 
the number of telephones and computer terminals available increases. This will cause a rightward shift of the demand 
curve. As the amount of inputs increases, the demand for labor will increase. If the terminal or the telephones 
malfunction, then the demand for that labor force will decrease. As the quantity of other inputs decreases, the demand 
for labor will decrease. Similarly, if prices of other inputs fall, production will become more profitable and 
suppliers will demand more labor to increase production. The opposite is also true. Higher input prices lower demand 
for labor
Table 2. Factors That Can Shift Demand


Click here to read more about “Trends and Challenges for Work in the 21st Century.”












SHIFTS IN LABOR SUPPLY

The supply of labor is upward-sloping and adheres to the law of supply: The higher the price, the greater the quantity 
supplied and the lower the price, the less quantity supplied. The supply curve

134                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


models the tradeoff between supplying labor into the market or using time in leisure activities at every given price 
level. The higher the wage, the more labor is willing to work and forego leisure activities. Table 3 lists some of the 
factors that will cause the supply to increase or decrease.

Factors             Results
An increased number of workers will cause the supply curve to shift to the right. An increased number of workers can be 
due to several factors, such as immigration, increasing population, an aging population, and

Number of Workers



Required Education





Government Policies
changing demographics. Policies that encourage immigration will increase the supply of labor, and vice versa. 
Population grows when birth rates exceed death rates; this eventually increases supply of labor when the former reach 
working age. An aging and therefore retiring population will decrease the supply of labor.
Another example of changing demographics is more women working outside of the home, which increases the supply of 
labor.
The more required education, the lower the supply. There is a lower supply of PhD mathematicians than of high school 
mathematics teachers; there is a lower supply of cardiologists than of primary care physicians; and there is a lower 
supply of physicians than of nurses.
Government policies can also affect the supply of labor for jobs. On the one hand, the government may support rules 
that set high qualifications for certain jobs: academic training, certificates or licenses, or experience. When these 
qualifications are made tougher, the number of qualified workers will decrease at any given wage. On the other hand, 
the government may also subsidize training or even reduce the required level of qualifications. For example, government 
might offer subsidies for nursing schools or nursing students.
Such provisions would shift the supply curve of nurses to the right. In addition, government policies that change the 
relative desirability of working versus not working also affect the labor supply. These include unemployment benefits, 
maternity leave, child care benefits and welfare policy. For example, child care benefits may increase the labor supply 
of working mothers. Long term unemployment benefits may discourage job searching for unemployed workers. All these 
policies must therefore be carefully designed to minimize any negative labor supply effects.
Table 3. Factors that Can Shift Supply

A change in salary will lead to a movement along labor demand or labor supply curves, but it will not shift those 
curves. However, other events like those outlined here will cause either the demand or the supply of labor to shift, 
and thus will move the labor market to a new equilibrium salary and quantity.

TECHNOLOGY AND WAGE INEQUALITY: THE FOUR-STEP PROCESS

Economic events can change the equilibrium salary (or wage) and quantity of labor. Consider how the  wave  of  new  
information  technologies,  like  computer  and  telecommunications  networks,  has affected low-skill and high-skill 
workers in the U.S. economy. From the perspective of employers who demand labor, these new technologies are often a 
substitute for low-skill laborers like file clerks who used to keep file cabinets full of paper records of 
transactions. However, the same new technologies are a complement to high-skill workers like managers, who benefit from 
the technological advances by being able to monitor more information, communicate more easily, and juggle a wider array 
of responsibilities. So, how will the new technologies affect the wages of high-skill and low-skill work- ers? For this 
question, the four-step process of analyzing how shifts in supply or demand affect a mar- ket (introduced in Demand and 
Supply) works in this way:

Step 1. What did the markets for low-skill labor and high-skill labor look like before the arrival of the new 
technologies? In Figure 2 (a) and Figure 2 (b), S0 is the original supply curve for labor and D0 is the original demand 
curve for labor in each market. In each graph, the original point of equilibrium, E0, occurs at the price W0 and the 
quantity Q0.

Step 2. Does the new technology affect the supply of labor from households or the demand for labor

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   135





















Figure 2. Technology and Wages: Applying Demand and Supply (a) The demand for low-skill labor shifts to the left when 
technology can do the job previously done by these workers. (b) New technologies can also increase the demand for 
high-skill labor in fields such as information technology and network administration.

from firms? The technology change described here affects demand for labor by firms that hire work- ers.

Step 3. Will the new technology increase or decrease demand? Based on the description earlier, as the substitute for 
low-skill labor becomes available, demand for low-skill labor will shift to the left, from D0 to D1. As the technology 
complement for high-skill labor becomes cheaper, demand for high-skill labor will shift to the right, from D0 to D1.

Step 4. The new equilibrium for low-skill labor, shown as point E1 with price W1 and quantity Q1, has a lower wage and 
quantity hired than the original equilibrium, E0. The new equilibrium for high-skill labor, shown as point E1 with 
price W1 and quantity Q1, has a higher wage and quantity hired than the original equilibrium (E0).

So, the demand and supply model predicts that the new computer and communications technologies will  raise  the  pay  
of  high-skill  workers  but  reduce  the  pay  of  low-skill  workers.  Indeed,  from  the 1970s to the mid-2000s, the 
wage gap widened between high-skill and low-skill labor. According to the National Center for Education Statistics, in 
1980, for example, a college graduate earned about 30% more than a high school graduate with comparable job experience, 
but by 2012, a college grad- uate earned about 60% more than an otherwise comparable high school graduate. Many 
economists believe that the trend toward greater wage inequality across the U.S. economy was primarily caused by the 
new technologies.

Visit this website to read about ten tech skills that have lost relevance in today’s workforce.

136                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 















PRICE FLOORS IN THE LABOR MARKET: LIVING WAGES AND MINIMUM WAGES

In contrast to goods and services markets, price ceilings are rare in labor markets, because rules that prevent people 
from earning income are not politically popular. There is one exception: sometimes limits are proposed on the high 
incomes of top business executives.

The labor market, however, presents some prominent examples of price floors, which are often used as an attempt to 
increase the wages of low-paid workers. The U.S. government sets a minimum wage, a price floor that makes it illegal 
for an employer to pay employees less than a certain hourly rate. In mid-2009, the U.S. minimum wage was raised to 
$7.25 per hour. Local political movements in a num- ber of U.S. cities have pushed for a higher minimum wage, which 
they call a living wage. Promoters of living wage laws maintain that the minimum wage is too low to ensure a reasonable 
standard of living. They base this conclusion on the calculation that, if you work 40 hours a week at a minimum wage of 
$7.25 per hour for 50 weeks a year, your annual income is $14,500, which is less than the official U.S. government 
definition of what it means for a family to be in poverty. (A family with two adults earning minimum wage and two young 
children will find it more cost efficient for one parent to provide childcare while the other works for income. So the 
family income would be $14,500, which is significantly lower than the federal poverty line for a family of four, which 
was $23,850 in 2014.)

Supporters of the living wage argue that full-time workers should be assured a high enough wage so that they can afford 
the essentials of life: food, clothing, shelter, and healthcare. Since Baltimore passed the first living wage law in 
1994, several dozen cities enacted similar laws in the late 1990s and the 2000s. The living wage ordinances do not 
apply to all employers, but they have specified that all employees of the city or employees of firms that are hired by 
the city be paid at least a certain wage that is usually a few dollars per hour above the U.S. minimum wage.

Figure 3 illustrates the situation of a city considering a living wage law. For simplicity, we assume that there is no 
federal minimum wage. The wage appears on the vertical axis, because the wage is the price in the labor market. Before 
the passage of the living wage law, the equilibrium wage is $10 per hour and the city hires 1,200 workers at this wage. 
However, a group of concerned citizens persuades the city council to enact a living wage law requiring employers to pay 
no less than $12 per hour. In response to the higher wage, 1,600 workers look for jobs with the city. At this higher 
wage, the city, as an employer, is willing to hire only 700 workers. At the price floor, the quantity supplied exceeds 
the quantity demanded, and a surplus of labor exists in this market. For workers who continue to have a job at a higher 
salary, life has improved. For those who were willing to work at the old wage rate but lost their jobs with the wage 
increase, life has not improved. Table 4 shows the differences in supply and demand at different wages.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   137





















Figure  3.  A  Living  Wage:  Example  of  a  Price  Floor  The  original equilibrium in this labor market is a wage of 
$10/hour and a quan- tity of 1,200 workers, shown at point E. Imposing a wage floor at
$12/hour leads to an excess supply of labor. At that wage, the quan- tity of labor supplied is 1,600 and the quantity 
of labor demanded is only 700.

Wage      Quantity Labor Demanded    Quantity Labor Supplied
$8/hr      1,900                                              500
$9/hr      1,500                                              900
$10/hr    1,200                                              1,200
$11/hr    900                                                 1,400
$12/hr    700                                                 1,600
$13/hr    500                                                 1,800
$14/hr    400                                                 1,900
Table 4. Living Wage: Example of a Price Floor


THE MINIMUM WAGE AS AN EXAMPLE OF A PRICE FLOOR

The U.S. minimum wage is a price floor that is set either very close to the equilibrium wage or even slightly below it. 
About 1% of American workers are actually paid the minimum wage. In other words, the vast majority of the U.S. labor 
force has its wages determined in the labor market, not as a result of the government price floor. But for workers with 
low skills and little experience, like those without a high school diploma or teenagers, the minimum wage is quite 
important. In many cities, the fed- eral minimum wage is apparently below the market price for unskilled labor, because 
employers offer more than the minimum wage to checkout clerks and other low-skill workers without any govern- ment 
prodding.

Economists  have  attempted  to  estimate  how  much  the  minimum  wage  reduces  the  quantity

138                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


demanded of low-skill labor. A typical result of such studies is that a 10% increase in the minimum wage would decrease 
the hiring of unskilled workers by 1 to 2%, which seems a relatively small reduc- tion. In fact, some studies have even 
found no effect of a higher minimum wage on employment at certain times and places—although these studies are 
controversial.
Let’s suppose that the minimum wage lies just slightly below the equilibrium wage level. Wages could fluctuate 
according to market forces above this price floor, but they would not be allowed to move beneath the floor. In this 
situation, the price floor minimum wage is said to be nonbinding —that is, the price floor is not determining the 
market outcome. Even if the minimum wage moves just a lit- tle  higher,  it  will  still  have  no  effect  on  the  
quantity  of  employment  in  the  economy,  as  long  as  it remains below the equilibrium wage. Even if the minimum 
wage is increased by enough so that it rises slightly above the equilibrium wage and becomes binding, there will be 
only a small excess supply gap between the quantity demanded and quantity supplied.

These insights help to explain why U.S. minimum wage laws have historically had only a small impact on employment. 
Since the minimum wage has typically been set close to the equilibrium wage for low-skill labor and sometimes even 
below it, it has not had a large effect in creating an excess sup- ply of labor. However, if the minimum wage were 
increased dramatically—say, if it were doubled to match the living wages that some U.S. cities have considered—then its 
impact on reducing the quan- tity demanded of employment would be far greater. The following Clear It Up feature 
describes in greater detail some of the arguments for and against changes to minimum wage.


WHAT’S THE HARM IN RAISING THE MINIMUM WAGE?

Because of the law of demand, a higher required wage will reduce the amount of low-skill employment either in terms of 
employees or in terms of work hours. Although there is controversy over the numbers, let’s say for the sake of the 
argument that a 10% rise in the minimum wage will reduce the employment of low-skill workers by 2%. Does this outcome 
mean that raising the minimum wage by 10% is bad public policy? Not necessarily.
If 98% of those receiving the minimum wage have a pay increase of 10%, but 2% of those receiving the minimum wage lose 
their jobs, are the gains for society as a whole greater than the losses? The answer is not clear, because job losses, 
even for a small group, may cause more pain than modest income gains for others. For one thing, we need to consider 
which mini- mum wage workers are losing their jobs. If the 2% of minimum wage workers who lose their jobs are 
struggling to support families, that is one thing. If those who lose their job are high school students picking up 
spending money over summer vacation, that is something else.
Another complexity is that many minimum wage workers do not work full-time for an entire year. Imagine a minimum wage 
worker who holds different part-time jobs for a few months at a time, with bouts of unemployment in between. The worker 
in this situation receives the 10% raise in the minimum wage when working, but also ends up working 2% fewer hours 
during the year because the higher minimum wage reduces how much employers want people to work. Overall, this worker’s 
income would rise because the 10% pay raise would more than offset the 2% fewer hours worked.
Of course, these arguments do not prove that raising the minimum wage is necessarily a good idea either. There may well 
be other, better public policy options for helping low-wage workers. (The Poverty and Economic Inequality chapter dis- 
cusses some possibilities.) The lesson from this maze of minimum wage arguments is that complex social problems rarely 
have simple answers. Even those who agree on how a proposed economic policy affects quantity demanded and quantity 
supplied may still disagree on whether the policy is a good idea.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   139

KEY CONCEPTS AND SUMMARY

In the labor market, households are on the supply side of the market and firms are on the demand side. In the market 
for financial capital, households and firms can be on either side of the market: they are suppliers of financial 
capital when they save or make financial investments, and demanders of finan- cial capital when they borrow or receive 
financial investments.

In the demand and supply analysis of labor markets, the price can be measured by the annual salary or hourly wage 
received. The quantity of labor can be measured in various ways, like number of workers or the number of hours worked.

Factors that can shift the demand curve for labor include: a change in the quantity demanded of the product that the 
labor produces; a change in the production process that uses more or less labor; and a change in government policy that 
affects the quantity of labor that firms wish to hire at a given wage. Demand can also increase or decrease (shift) in 
response to: workers’ level of education and training, technology, the number of companies, and availability and price 
of other inputs.

The main factors that can shift the supply curve for labor are: how desirable a job appears to workers relative  to  
the  alternatives,  government  policy  that  either  restricts  or  encourages  the  quantity  of workers trained for 
the job, the number of workers in the economy, and required education.

SELF-CHECK QUESTIONS



1.    In the labor market, what causes a movement along the demand curve? What causes a shift in the demand curve?
2.    In the labor market, what causes a movement along the supply curve? What causes a shift in the supply curve?
3.    Why is a living wage considered a price floor? Does imposing a living wage have the same outcome as a minimum 
wage?



REVIEW QUESTIONS



1.    What is the “price” commonly called in the labor market?
2.    Are households demanders or suppliers in the goods market? Are firms demanders or suppliers in the goods market? 
What about the labor market and the financial market?
3.    Name some factors that can cause a shift in the demand curve in labor markets.
4.    Name some factors that can cause a shift in the supply curve in labor markets.




CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS



1.    Other than the demand for labor, what would be another example of a “derived demand?”

140                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 



2.    Suppose that a 5% increase in the minimum wage causes a 5% reduction in employment. How would this affect 
employers and how would it affect workers? In your opinion, would this be a good policy?
3.    What assumption is made for a minimum wage to be a nonbinding price floor? What assumption is made for a living 
wage price floor to be binding?



PROBLEMS



1.    Identify each of the following as involving either demand or supply. Draw a circular flow diagram and label the 
flows A through F. (Some choices can be on both sides of the goods market.)

a.    Households in the labor market
b.    Firms in the goods market
c.    Firms in the financial market
d.    Households in the goods market
e.    Firms in the labor market
f.    Households in the financial market

2.    Predict how each of the following events will raise or lower the equilibrium wage and quantity of coal miners in 
West Virginia. In each case, sketch a demand and supply diagram to illustrate your answer.

a.    The price of oil rises.
b.    New coal-mining equipment is invented that is cheap and requires few workers to run.
c.    Several major companies that do not mine coal open factories in West Virginia, offering a lot of well-paid jobs.
d.    Government imposes costly new regulations to make coal-mining a safer job.



REFERENCES

American Community Survey. 2012. “School Enrollment and Work Status: 2011.” Accessed April 13, 2015. 
http://www.census.gov/prod/2013pubs/acsbr11-14.pdf.

National Center for Educational Statistics. “Digest of Education Statistics.” (2008 and 2010). Accessed December 11, 
2013. nces.ed.gov.

GLOSSARY
minimum wage a price floor that makes it illegal for an employer to pay employees less than a certain hourly rate

SOLUTIONS


Answers to Self-Cfteck Questions

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   141




1.    Changes in the wage rate (the price of labor) cause a movement along the demand curve. A change in anything else 
that affects demand for labor (e.g., changes in output, changes in the production process that use more or less labor, 
government regulation) causes a shift in the demand curve.
2.    Changes in the wage rate (the price of labor) cause a movement along the supply curve. A change in anything else 
that affects supply of labor (e.g., changes in how desirable the job is perceived to be, government policy to promote 
training in the field) causes a shift in the supply curve.
3.    Since a living wage is a suggested minimum wage, it acts like a price floor (assuming, of course, that it is 
followed). If the living wage is binding, it will cause an excess supply of labor at that wage rate.
