


CHAPTER 21. ISSUES IN LABOR MARKETS: UNIONS, DISCRIMINATION, IMMIGRATION




INTRODUCTION  TO  ISSUES  IN  LABOR  MARKETS:  UNIONS, DISCRIMINATION,  IMMIGRATION






























Figure 1. Arguing for Collective Bargaining. In 2011, thousands of people in Wisconsin protested against a bill that 
would eliminate the right to collective bargaining over everything except wages. (Credit: modification of work by 
Fibonacci Blue/Flickr Creative Commons)


COLLECTIVE BARGAINING IN WISCONSIN

In 2011, thousands of people crowded into the Wisconsin State Capitol rotunda carrying placards reading “Kill the 
Bill.” What were they protesting? The newly elected Wisconsin governor, Scott Walker, supported a bill proposed by 
Republican state legislators that would have effectively eliminated most collective bargaining rights of public sector 
union employees. Collective bargaining laws require employers to sit down and negotiate with the representative union 
of their employees. The governor argued that the state needed to close a multi-billion-dollar deficit, so legislators 
proposed a Budget Repair Act that would eliminate collective bargaining over everything but wages. The bill passed and 
was signed into law after a significant level of drama that saw Democratic legislators leaving the state so that there 
would not be enough legislators in house to continue the debate or bring the bill to a vote. The law proved so 
unpopular that Governor Walker faced a recall vote in 2012. The recall attempt was defeated, but the law has been 
subjected to numerous court reviews. The discussion about the role of collective bargaining is not over.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   587



Why was a bill like this proposed? Are collective bargaining rights necessary for public sector employees? How would an 
economist respond to such a bill? This chapter lays out the changing role of unions in U.S. labor markets.


CHAPTER OBJECTIVES



Introduction to Issues in Labor Markets: Unions, Discrimination, Immigration
In this chapter, you will learn about:

•    Labor Unions

•    Employment Discrimination

•    Immigration



hen a job applicant is bargaining with an employer for a position, the applicant is often at a disadvantage—needing the 
job more than the employer needs that particular applicant. John Bates Clark (1847–1938), often named as the first 
great American economist, wrote in 1907:
“In the making of the wages contract the individual laborer is always at a disadvantage. He has some- thing which he is 
obliged to sell and which his employer is not obliged to take, since he [that is, the employer] can reject single men 
with impunity.”

To give workers more power, the U.S. government has passed, in response to years of labor protests, a number of laws to 
create a more equal balance of power between workers and employers. These laws include some of the following:

•   Setting minimum hourly wages
•   Setting maximum hours of work (at least before employers pay overtime rates)
•   Prohibiting child labor
•   Regulating health and safety conditions in the workplace
•   Preventing discrimination on the basis of race, ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation, and age
•   Requiring employers to provide family leave
•   Requiring employers to give advance notice of layoffs
•   Covering workers with unemployment insurance
•   Setting a limit on the number of immigrant workers from other countries

Table 1 lists some prominent U.S. workplace protection laws. Many of the laws listed in the table were only the start 
of labor market regulations in these areas and have been followed, over time, by other related laws, regulations, and 
court rulings.

588                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


Law                                Protection
National Labor-

Management Relations Act of 1935 (the “Wagner Act”)

Social Security Act of 1935

Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938

Taft-Hartley Act of 1947
Establishes procedures for establishing a union that firms are obligated to follow; sets up the National Labor 
Relations Board for deciding disputes

Under Title III, establishes a state-run system of unemployment insurance, in which workers pay into a state fund when 
they are employed and received benefits for a time when they are unemployed
Establishes the minimum wage, limits on child labor, and rules requiring payment of overtime pay for those in jobs that 
are paid by the hour and exceed 40 hours per week
Allows states to decide whether all workers at a firm can be required to join a union as a condition of employment; in 
the case of a disruptive union strike, permits the president to declare a “cooling-off period” during which workers 
have to return to work
Civil Rights Act of 1964       Title VII of the Act prohibits discrimination in employment on the basis of race, 
gender, national origin, religion, or sexual orientation


Occupational Health and Safety Act of 1970
Employee Retirement and Income Security Act of 1974
Pregnancy Discrimination Act of 1978
Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986
Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification Act of 1988
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990
Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993
Pension Protection Act of 2006
Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009

Creates the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), which protects workers from physical harm in the 
workplace

Regulates employee pension rules and benefits


Prohibits discrimination against women in the workplace who are planning to get pregnant or who are returning to work 
after pregnancy

Prohibits hiring of illegal immigrants; requires employers to ask for proof of citizenship; protects rights of legal 
immigrants

Requires employers with more than 100 employees to provide written notice 60 days before plant closings or large 
layoffs

Prohibits discrimination against those with disabilities and requires reasonable accommodations for them on the job
Allows employees to take up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave per year for family reasons, including birth or family illness
Penalizes firms for underfunding their pension plans and gives employees more information about their pension accounts
Restores protection for pay discrimination claims on the basis of sex, race, national origin, age, religion, or 
disability
Table 1. Prominent U.S. Workplace Protection Laws

This chapter covers three issues in the labor markets: labor unions, discrimination against women or minority groups, 
and immigration and U.S. labor market issues.



21.1  UNIONS



LEARNING OBJECTIVES


By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Explain the concept of labor unions, including membership levels and wages

•    Evaluate arguments for and against labor unions

•    Analyze reasons for the decline in U.S. union membership



labor union is  an  organization  of  workers  that  negotiates  with  employers  over  wages  and working conditions. 
A labor union seeks to change the balance of power between employers and workers by requiring employers to deal with 
workers collectively, rather than as individu-
als. Thus, negotiations between unions and firms are sometimes called collective bargaining.

The subject of labor unions can be controversial. Supporters of labor unions view them as the work- ers’ primary line 
of defense against efforts by profit-seeking firms to hold down wages and benefits. Critics of labor unions view them 
as having a tendency to grab as much as they can in the short term, even if it means injuring workers in the long run 
by driving firms into bankruptcy or by blocking the new technologies and production methods that lead to economic 
growth. We will start with some facts about union membership in the United States.

FACTS ABOUT UNION MEMBERSHIP AND PAY

According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor and Statistics, about 11.1% of all U.S. workers belong to unions. Following are 
some of the facts provided by the bureau for 2014:

•   12.0% of U.S. male workers belong to unions; 10.5% of female workers do
•   11.1% of white workers, 13.4 % of black workers, and 9.8 % of Hispanic workers belong to unions
•   12.5% of full-time workers and 6.0% of part-time workers are union members
•   4.2% of workers ages 16–24 belong to unions, as do 14% of workers ages 45-54
•   Occupations in which relatively high percentages of workers belong to unions are the federal government (26.9% 
belong to a union), state government (31.3%), local government (41.7%); transportation and utilities (20.6%); natural 
resources, construction, and maintenance (16.3%); and production, transportation, and material moving (14.7%)

590                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


•   Occupations that have relatively low percentages of unionized workers are agricultural workers (1.4%), financial 
services (1.1%), professional and business services (2.4%), leisure and hospitality (2.7%), and wholesale and retail 
trade (4.7%)

In summary, the percentage of workers belonging to a union is higher for men than women; higher for blacks than for 
whites or Hispanics; higher for the 45–64 age range; and higher among workers in government and manufacturing than 
workers in agriculture or service-oriented jobs. Table 2 lists the largest U.S. labor unions and their membership.

Union                                                                                                                   
                           Membersftip
National Education Association (NEA)                                                                                    
                                                  3.2 million
Service Employees International Union (SEIU)                                                                            
                                           2.1 million
American Federation of Teachers (AFT)                                                                                   
                                                 1.5 million
International Brotherhood of Teamsters (IBT)                                                                            
                                            1.4 million
The American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Workers (AFSCME)                                                
           1.3 million
United Food and Commercial Workers International Union                                                                  
                            1.3 million
United Steelworkers                                                                                                     
                                                                  1.2 million
International Union, United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural Implement Workers of America (UAW)    990,000 
International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers                                                           
                            720,000
International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers (IBEW)                                                                  
                                   675,000
Table 2. The Largest American Unions in 2013. (Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics)

In terms of pay, benefits, and hiring, U.S. unions offer a good news/bad news story. The good news for unions and their 
members is that their members earn about 20% more than nonunion workers, even after adjusting for factors such as years 
of work experience and education level. The bad news for unions is that the share of U.S. workers who belong to a labor 
union has been steadily declin- ing for 50 years, as shown in Figure 1. About one-quarter of all U.S. workers belonged 
to a union in the mid-1950s, but only 11.1% of U.S. workers are union members today. If you leave out workers employed 
by the government (which includes teachers in public schools), only 6.6% of the workers employed by private firms now 
work for a union.

The  following  section  analyzes  the  higher  pay  union  workers  receive  compared  the  pay  rates  for nonunion 
workers. The following section analyzes declining union membership levels. An overview of these two issues will allow 
us to discuss many aspects of how unions work.

HIGHER WAGES FOR UNION WORKERS

Why  might  union  workers  receive  higher  pay?  What  are  the  limits  on  how  much  higher  pay  they can 
receive? To analyze these questions, let’s consider a situation where all firms in an industry must negotiate with a 
single union, and no firm is allowed to hire nonunion labor. If no labor union existed in this market, then equilibrium 
(E) in the labor market would occur at the intersection of the demand for labor (D) and the supply of labor (S) in 
Figure 2. The union can, however, threaten that, unless firms agree to the wages they demand, the workers will strike. 
As a result, the labor union manages to achieve, through negotiations with the firms, a union wage of Wu for its 
members, above what the equilibrium wage would otherwise have been.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   591





















Figure 1. Percentage of Wage and Salary Workers Who Are Union Members. The share of wage and salary workers who belong 
to unions rose sharply in the 1930s and 1940s, but has tailed off since then to 11.1% of all workers in 2014.























Figure 2. Union Wage Negotiations. Without a union, the equilib- rium  at  E  would  have  involved  the  wage  We  and 
 the  quantity  of labor  Qe.  However,  the  union  is  able  to  use  its  bargaining  power to raise the wage to Wu. 
The result is an excess supply of labor for union jobs. That is, a quantity of labor supplied, Qs is greater than 
firms’ quantity demanded for labor, Qd.

592                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


This labor market situation resembles what a monopoly firm does in selling a product, but in this case a union is a 
monopoly selling  labor to firms.  At the higher union wage Wu, the firms in this industry will hire less labor than 
they would have hired in equilibrium. Moreover, an excess supply of workers want union jobs, but firms will not be 
hiring for such jobs.

From the union point of view, workers who receive higher wages are better off. However, notice that the quantity of 
workers (Qd) hired at the union wage Wu is smaller than the quantity Qe that would have been hired at the original 
equilibrium wage. A sensible union must recognize that when it pushes up the wage, it also reduces the incentive of 
firms to hire. This situation does not necessarily mean that union workers are fired. Instead, it may be that when 
union workers move on to other jobs or retire, they are not always replaced. Or perhaps when a firm expands production, 
it expands employ- ment somewhat less with a higher union wage than it would have done with the lower equilibrium wage. 
Or perhaps a firm decides to purchase inputs from nonunion producers, rather than producing them with its own highly 
paid unionized workers. Or perhaps the firm moves or opens a new facility in a state or country where unions are less 
powerful.

From  the  firm’s  point  of  view,  the  key  question  is  whether  the  higher  wage  of  union  workers  is matched 
by higher productivity. If so, then the firm can afford to pay the higher union wages and, indeed, the demand curve for 
“unionized” labor could actually shift to the right. This could reduce the job losses as the equilibrium employment 
level shifts to the right and the difference between the equilibrium and the union wages will have been reduced. If 
worker unionization does not increase productivity, then the higher union wage will cause lower profits or losses for 
the firm.

Union workers might have higher productivity than nonunion workers for a number of reasons. First, higher wages may 
elicit higher productivity. Second, union workers tend to stay longer at a given job, a trend that reduces the 
employer’s costs for training and hiring and results in workers with more years of experience. Many unions also offer 
job training and apprenticeship programs.

In addition, firms that are confronted with union demands for higher wages may choose production methods that involve 
more physical capital and less labor, resulting in increased labor productivity. Table 3 provides an example. Assume 
that a firm can produce a home exercise cycle with three differ- ent combinations of labor and manufacturing equipment. 
Say that labor is paid $16 an hour (includ- ing benefits) and the machines for manufacturing cost $200 each. Under 
these circumstances, the total cost of producing a home exercise cycle will be lowest if the firm adopts the plan of 50 
hours of labor and one machine, as the table shows. Now, suppose that a union negotiates a wage of $20 an hour 
including benefits. In this case, it makes no difference to the firm whether it uses more hours of labor and fewer 
machines or less labor and more machines, though it might prefer to use more machines and to hire fewer union workers. 
(After all, machines never threaten to strike—but they do not buy the final product or service either.) In the final 
column of the table, the wage has risen to $24 an hour. In this case, the firm clearly has an incentive for using the 
plan that involves paying for fewer hours of labor and using three machines. If management responds to union demands 
for higher wages by investing more in machinery, then union workers can be more productive because they are working 
with more or better physical capital equipment than the typical nonunion worker. However, the firm will need to hire 
fewer workers.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   593

Hours of Labor
Number of Macftines
Cost of Labor + Cost of Macftine $16/ftour
Cost of Labor + Cost of Macftine $20/ftour
Cost of Labor + Cost of Macftine $24/ftr
30                   3                              $480 + $600 = $1,080                    $600 + $600 = $1,200        
            $720 + $600 = $1,320
40                   2                              $640 + $400 = $1,040                    $800 + $400 = $1,200        
            $960 + $400 = $1,360
50                   1                              $800 + $200 = $1,000                    $1,000 + $200 = $1,200      
           $1,200 + $200 = $1,400
Table 3. Three Production Choices to Manufacture a Home Exercise Cycle

In some cases, unions have discouraged the use of labor-saving physical capital equipment—out of the reasonable fear 
that new machinery will reduce the number of union jobs. For example, in 2002, the union representing longshoremen who 
unload ships and the firms that operate shipping com- panies  and  port  facilities  staged  a  work  stoppage  that  
shut  down  the  ports  on  the  western  coast of the United States. Two key issues in the dispute were the desire of 
the shipping companies and port operators to use handheld scanners for record-keeping and computer-operated cabs for 
loading and unloading ships—changes which the union opposed, along with overtime pay. President Obama threatened to use 
the Labor Management Relations Act of 1947—commonly known as the Taft-Hart- ley Act—where a court can impose an 80-day 
“cooling-off period” in order to allow time for nego- tiations to proceed without the threat of a work stoppage. 
Federal mediators were called in, and the two sides agreed to a deal in February 2015. The ultimate agreement allowed 
the new technologies, but also kept wages, health, and pension benefits high for workers. In the past, presidential use 
of the Taft-Hartley Act sometimes has made labor negotiations more bitter and argumentative but, in this case, it seems 
to have smoothed the road to an agreement.

In other instances, unions have proved quite willing to adopt new technologies. In one prominent example, during the 
1950s and 1960s, the United Mineworkers union demanded that mining com- panies install labor-saving machinery in the 
mines. The mineworkers’ union realized that over time, the new machines would reduce the number of jobs in the mines, 
but the union leaders also knew that the mine owners would have to pay higher wages if the workers became more 
productive, and mech- anization was a necessary step toward greater productivity.

In fact, in some cases union workers may be more willing to accept new technology than nonunion workers, because the 
union workers believe that the union will negotiate to protect their jobs and wages, whereas nonunion workers may be 
more concerned that the new technology will replace their jobs. In addition, union workers, who typically have higher 
job market experience and training, are likely to suffer less and benefit more than non-union workers from the 
introduction of new technol- ogy. Overall, it is hard to make a definitive case that union workers as a group are 
always either more or less welcoming to new technology than are nonunion workers.

THE DECLINE IN U.S. UNION MEMBERSHIP

The proportion of U.S. workers belonging to unions has declined dramatically since the early 1950s. Economists have 
offered a number of possible explanations:

•   The shift from manufacturing to service industries
•   The force of globalization and increased competition from foreign producers
•   A reduced desire for unions because of the workplace protection laws now in place

594                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


•   U.S. legal environment that makes it relatively more difficult for unions to organize workers and expand their 
membership

Let’s discuss each of these four explanations in more detail.

A first possible explanation for the decline in the share of U.S. workers belonging to unions involves the patterns of 
job growth in the manufacturing and service sectors of the economy shown in Figure
3. The U.S. economy had about 15 million manufacturing jobs in 1960. This total rose to 19 million by the late 1970s 
and then declined to 17 million in 2013. Meanwhile, the number of jobs in service industries and in government combined 
rose from 35 million in 1960 to over 118 million by 2013, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Because over 
time unions were stronger in manufacturing than in service industries, the growth in jobs was not happening where the 
unions were. It is inter- esting to note that several of the biggest unions in the country are made up of government 
workers, including the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees (AFSCME); the Ser- vice Employees 
International Union; and the National Education Association. The membership of each of these unions is listed in Table 
2. Outside of government employees, however, unions have not had great success in organizing the service sector.





























Figure 3. The Growth of Service Jobs. Jobs in services have increased dramatically in the last few decades. Jobs in 
government have increased modestly. Jobs in manufacturing have not changed much, although they have trended down in 
recent years. Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   595

A second explanation for the decline in the share of unionized workers looks at import competition. Starting in the 
1960s, U.S. carmakers and steelmakers faced increasing competition from Japanese and European manufacturers. As sales 
of imported cars and steel rose, the number of jobs in U.S. auto manufacturing fell. This industry is heavily 
unionized. Not surprisingly, membership in the United Auto Workers, which was 975,000 in 1985, had fallen to roughly 
390,000 by 2015. Import competi- tion not only decreases the employment in sectors where unions were once strong, but 
also decreases the bargaining power of unions in those sectors. However, as we have seen, unions that organize pub- 
lic-sector workers, who are not threatened by import competition, have continued to see growth.

A third possible reason for the decline in the number of union workers is that citizens often call on their elected 
representatives to pass laws concerning work conditions, overtime, parental leave, reg- ulation of pensions, and other 
issues. Unions offered strong political support for these laws aimed at protecting workers but, in an ironic twist, the 
passage of those laws then made many workers feel less need for unions.

These first three possible reasons for the decline of unions are all somewhat plausible, but they have a common 
problem. Most other developed economies have experienced similar economic and polit- ical trends, such as the shift 
from manufacturing to services, globalization, and increasing govern- ment social benefits and regulation of the 
workplace. Clearly there are cultural differences between countries as to their acceptance of unions in the workplace. 
The share of the population belonging to unions in other countries is very high compared with the share in the United 
States. Table 4 shows the proportion of workers in a number of the world’s high-income economies who belong to unions. 
The United States is near the bottom, along with France and Spain. The last column shows union cover- age, defined as 
including those workers whose wages are determined by a union negotiation even if the workers do not officially belong 
to the union. In the United States, union membership is almost identical to union coverage. However, in many countries, 
the wages of many workers who do not offi- cially belong to a union are still determined by collective bargaining 
between unions and firms.


Country       Union Density: Percentage of Workers Belonging to a Union
Union Coverage: Percentage of Workers Wftose Wages Are Determined by Union Bargaining
Austria             37%                                                                           99%
France              9%                                                                             95%
Germany         26%                                                                           63%
Japan                22%                                                                           23%
Netherlands    25%                                                                           82%
Spain                11.3%                                                                       81%
Sweden            82%                                                                           92%

United Kingdom
United States

29%                                                                           35%

11.1%                                                                       12.5%
Table 4. International Comparisons of Union Membership and Coverage in 2012. (Source, CIA World Factbook, retrieved 
from www.cia.gov)

These international differences in union membership suggest a fourth reason for the decline of union membership in the 
United States: perhaps U.S. laws are less friendly to the formation of unions than such laws in other countries. The 
close connection between union membership and a friendly legal

596                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


environment is apparent in the history of U.S. unions. The great rise in union membership in the 1930s followed the 
passage of the National Labor-Management Relations Act of 1935, which speci- fied that workers had a right to organize 
unions and that management had to give them a fair chance to do so. The U.S. government strongly encouraged the 
formation of unions during the early 1940s in the belief that unions would help to coordinate the all-out production 
efforts needed during World War II. However, after World War II came the passage of the Taft-Hartley Act of 1947, which 
gave states the power to allow workers to opt out of the union in their workplace if they so desired. This law made the 
legal climate less encouraging to those seeking to form unions, and union membership levels soon started declining.

The procedures for forming a union differ substantially from country to country. For example, the procedures in the 
United States and those in Canada are strikingly different. When a group of work- ers wish to form a union in the 
United States, they announce this fact and an election date is set when the employees at a firm will vote in a secret 
ballot on whether to form a union. Supporters of the union lobby for a “yes” vote, and the management of the firm 
lobbies for a “no” vote—often even hir- ing outside consultants for assistance in swaying workers to vote “no.” In 
Canada, by contrast, a union is formed when a sufficient proportion of workers (usually about 60%) sign an official 
card saying that they want a union. There is no separate “election date.” The management of Canadian firms is limited 
by law in its ability to lobby against the union. In addition, though it is illegal to discriminate and fire workers 
based on their union activity in the United States, the penalties are slight, making this a not so costly way of 
deterring union activity. In short, forming unions is easier in Canada—and in many other countries—than in the United 
States.

In summary, union membership in the United States is lower than in many other high-income coun- tries,  a  difference  
that  may  be  due  to  different  legal  environments  and  cultural  attitudes  toward unions.

Visit this website to read about recent protests regarding minimum wage for fast food employees.













KEY CONCEPTS AND SUMMARY

A labor union is an organization of workers that negotiates as a group with employers over compen- sation and work 
conditions. Union workers in the United States are paid more on average than other workers with comparable education 
and experience. Thus, either union workers must be more pro- ductive to match this higher pay or the higher pay will 
lead employers to find ways of hiring fewer union workers than they otherwise would. American union membership has been 
falling for decades. Some possible reasons include the shift of jobs to service industries; greater competition from 
global-

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   597

ization; the passage of worker-friendly legislation; and U.S. laws that are less favorable to organizing unions.

SELF-CHECK QUESTIONS



1.    Table 5 shows the quantity demanded and supplied in the labor market for driving city buses in the town of 
Unionville, where all the bus drivers belong to a union.

Wage Per Hour   Quantity of Workers Demanded   Quantity of Workers Supplied

$14                          12,000                                                     6,000

$16                          10,000                                                     7,000

$18                          8,000                                                       8,000

$20                          6,000                                                       9,000

$22                          4,000                                                       10,000

$24                          2,000                                                       11,000

Table 5.


a.    What would the equilibrium wage and quantity be in this market if no union existed?
b.    Assume that the union has enough negotiating power to raise the wage to $4 per hour higher than it would 
otherwise be. Is there now excess demand or excess supply of labor?

2.    Do unions typically oppose new technology out of a fear that it will reduce the number of union jobs? Why or why 
not?
3.    Compared with the share of workers in most other high-income countries, is the share of U.S. workers whose wages 
are determined by union bargaining higher or lower? Why or why not?
4.    Are firms with a high percentage of union employees more likely to go bankrupt because of the higher wages that 
they pay? Why or why not?
5.    Do countries with a higher percentage of unionized workers usually have less growth in productivity because of 
strikes and other disruptions caused by the unions? Why or why not?



REVIEW QUESTIONS



1.    What is a labor union?
2.    Why do employers have a natural advantage in bargaining with employees?
3.    What are some of the most important laws that protect employee rights?
4.    How does the presence of a labor union change negotiations between employers and workers?
5.    What is the long-term trend in American union membership?
6.    Would you expect the presence of labor unions to lead to higher or lower pay for worker-members? Would you expect 
a higher or lower quantity of workers hired by those employers? Explain briefly.
7.    What are the main causes for the recent trends in union membership rates in the United States? Why are union 
rates lower in the United States than in many other developed countries?

598                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 



CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS



1.    Are unions and technological improvements complementary? Why or why not?
2.    Will union membership continue to decline? Why or why not?



REFERENCES

AFL-CIO.  “Training  and  Apprenticeships.”  http://www.aflcio.org/Learn-About-Unions/Training- and-Apprenticeships.

Central  Intelligence  Agency.  “The  World  Factbook.”  https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the- 
world-factbook/index.html.

Clark, John Bates. Essentials of Economic Theory: As Applied to Modern Problems of Industry and Public Pol- icy. New 
York: A. M. Kelley, 1907, 501.

United Auto Workers (UAW). “About: Who We Are.” http://www.uaw.org/page/who-we-are.

United  States  Department  of  Labor:  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics.  “Economic  News  Release:  Union Members    
Summary.”    Last    modified    January    23,    2013.    http://www.bls.gov/news.release/ union2.nr0.htm.

United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2015. “Economic News; Union Mem- bers Summary.” Accessed 
April 13, 2015. http://www.bls.gov/news.release/union2.nr0.htm.

GLOSSARY

collective bargaining negotiations between unions and a firm or firms
labor union an organization of workers that negotiates with employers over wages and working conditions

SOLUTIONS



Answers to Self-Cfteck Questions

1.                a.    With no union, the equilibrium wage rate would be $18 per hour and there would be 8,000 bus 
drivers.
b.    If the union has enough negotiating power to raise the wage to $4 per hour higher than under the original 
equilibrium, the new wage would be $22 per hour. At this wage, 4,000 workers would be demanded while 10,000 would be 
supplied, leading to an excess supply of 6,000 workers.

2.    Unions have sometimes opposed new technology out of a fear of losing jobs, but in other cases unions have helped 
to facilitate the introduction of new technology because unionized workers felt that the union was looking after their 
interests or that their higher skills meant that their jobs were essentially protected. And the new technologies meant 
increased productivity.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   599




3.    In a few other countries (such as France and Spain), the percentage of workers belonging to a union is similar to 
that in the United States. Union membership rates, however, are generally lower in the United States. When the share of 
workers whose wages are determined by union negotiations is considered, the United States ranks by far the lowest 
(because in countries like France and Spain, union negotiations often determine pay even for nonunion employees).
4.    No. While some unions may cause firms to go bankrupt, other unions help firms to become more competitive. No 
overall pattern exists.
5.    From a social point of view, the benefits of unions and the costs seem to counterbalance. There is no evidence 
that in countries with a higher percentage of unionized workers, the economies grow more or less slowly.
