


CHAPTER 13. MONOPOLISTIC COMPETITION AND OLIGOPOLY




INTRODUCTION  TO  MONOPOLISTIC  COMPETITION  AND OLIGOPOLY

































Figure 1. Competing Brands? The laundry detergent market is one that is characterized neither as perfect com- petition 
nor monopoly. (Credit: modification of work by Pixel Drip/Flickr Creative Commons)


THE TEMPTATION TO DEFY THE LAW

Laundry detergent and bags of ice—products of industries that seem pretty mundane, maybe even boring. Hardly! Both have 
been the center of clandestine meetings and secret deals worthy of a spy novel. In France, between 1997 and 2004, the 
top four laundry detergent producers (Proctor & Gamble, Henkel, Unilever, and Colgate-Palmolive) controlled about 90 
percent of the French soap market. Officials from the soap firms were meeting secretly, in out-of-the-way, small cafés 
around Paris. Their goals: Stamp out competition and set prices.
Around the same time, the top five Midwest ice makers (Home City Ice, Lang Ice, Tinley Ice, Sisler’s Dairy, and 
Products of Ohio) had similar goals in mind when they secretly agreed to divide up the bagged ice market.
If both groups could meet their goals, it would enable each to act as though they were a single firm—in essence, a 
monop-

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   365



oly—and enjoy monopoly-size profits. The problem? In many parts of the world, including the European Union and the 
United States, it is illegal for firms to divide up markets and set prices collaboratively.
These two cases provide examples of markets that are characterized neither as perfect competition nor monopoly. 
Instead, these firms are competing in market structures that lie between the extremes of monopoly and perfect 
competition. How do they behave? Why do they exist? We will revisit this case later, to find out what happened.


CHAPTER OBJECTIVES



Introduction to Monopolistic Competition and Oligopoly
In this chapter, you will learn about:

•    Monopolistic Competition

•    Oligopoly



erfect competition and monopoly are at opposite ends of the competition spectrum. A perfectly competitive market has 
many firms selling identical products, who all act as price takers in the face of the competition. If you recall, price 
takers are firms that have no market power. They
simply have to take the market price as given.

Monopoly arises when a single firm sells a product for which there are no close substitutes. Microsoft, for instance, 
has been considered a monopoly because of its domination of the operating systems mar- ket.

What about the vast majority of real world firms and organizations that fall between these extremes, firms that could 
be described as imperfectly competitive? What determines their behavior? They have more influence over the price they 
charge than perfectly competitive firms, but not as much as a monopoly would. What will they do?

One type of imperfectly competitive market is called monopolistic competition. Monopolistically competitive markets 
feature a large number of competing firms, but the products that they sell are not identical. Consider, as an example, 
the Mall of America in Minnesota, the largest shopping mall in the United States. In 2010, the Mall of America had 24 
stores that sold women’s “ready-to-wear” clothing (like Ann Taylor and Urban Outfitters), another 50 stores that sold 
clothing for both men and women (like Banana Republic, J. Crew, and Nordstrom’s), plus 14 more stores that sold women’s 
specialty clothing (like Motherhood Maternity and Victoria’s Secret). Most of the markets that con- sumers encounter at 
the retail level are monopolistically competitive.

The other type of imperfectly competitive market is oligopoly. Oligopolistic markets are those dom- inated by a small 
number of firms. Commercial aircraft provides a good example: Boeing and Airbus each produce slightly less than 50% of 
the large commercial aircraft in the world. Another example is the U.S. soft drink industry, which is dominated by 
Coca-Cola and Pepsi. Oligopolies are character- ized by high barriers to entry with firms choosing output, pricing, and 
other decisions strategically based on the decisions of the other firms in the market. In this chapter, we first 
explore how monop- olistically competitive firms will choose their profit-maximizing level of output. We will then dis- 
cuss oligopolistic firms, which face two conflicting temptations: to collaborate as if they were a single

366                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


monopoly, or to individually compete to gain profits by expanding output levels and cutting prices. Oligopolistic 
markets and firms can also take on elements of monopoly and of perfect competition.



13.1  MONOPOLISTIC  COMPETITION



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Explain the significance of differentiated products

•    Describe how a monopolistic competitor chooses price and quantity

•    Discuss entry, exit, and efficiency as they pertain to monopolistic competition

•    Analyze how advertising can impact monopolistic competition



onopolistic  competition  involves  many  firms  competing  against  each  other,  but  selling products that are 
distinctive in some way. Examples include stores that sell different styles of clothing; restaurants or grocery stores 
that sell different kinds of food; and even products
like golf balls or beer that may be at least somewhat similar but differ in public perception because of advertising 
and brand names. There are over 600,000 restaurants in the United States. When products are distinctive, each firm has 
a mini-monopoly on its particular style or flavor or brand name. How- ever,  firms  producing  such  products  must  
also  compete  with  other  styles  and  flavors  and  brand names.  The  term  “monopolistic  competition”  captures  
this  mixture  of  mini-monopoly  and  tough competition, and the following Clear It Up feature introduces its 
derivation.


WHO INVENTED THE THEORY OF IMPERFECT COMPETITION?

The theory of imperfect competition was developed by two economists independently but simultaneously in 1933. The first 
was Edward Chamberlin of Harvard University who published The Economics of Monopolistic Competition. The second was 
Joan Robinson of Cambridge University who published The Economics of Imperfect Competition. Robinson subsequently 
became interested in macroeconomics where she became a prominent Keynesian, and later a post-Keynesian economist. (See 
the Welcome to Economics! and The Keynesian Perspective chapters for more on Keynes.)


DIFFERENTIATED PRODUCTS

A firm can try to make its products different from those of its competitors in several ways: physical aspects of the 
product, location from which the product is sold, intangible aspects of the product, and perceptions of the product. 
Products that are distinctive in one of these ways are called differentiated products.

Physical aspects of a product include all the phrases you hear in advertisements: unbreakable bottle,

368                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


nonstick surface, freezer-to-microwave, non-shrink, extra spicy, newly redesigned for your comfort. The  location  of  
a  firm  can  also  create  a  difference  between  producers.  For  example,  a  gas  station located at a heavily 
traveled intersection can probably sell more gas, because more cars drive by that corner. A supplier to an automobile 
manufacturer may find that it is an advantage to locate close to the car factory.

Intangible aspects can differentiate a product, too. Some intangible aspects may be promises like a guarantee of 
satisfaction or money back, a reputation for high quality, services like free delivery, or offering a loan to purchase 
the product. Finally, product differentiation may occur in the minds of buyers. For example, many people could not tell 
the difference in taste between common varieties of beer or cigarettes if they were blindfolded but, because of past 
habits and advertising, they have strong preferences for certain brands. Advertising can play a role in shaping these 
intangible preferences.

The concept of differentiated products is closely related to the degree of variety that is available. If everyone in 
the economy wore only blue jeans, ate only white bread, and drank only tap water, then the markets for clothing, food, 
and drink would be much closer to perfectly competitive. The variety of styles, flavors, locations, and characteristics 
creates product differentiation and monopolistic com- petition.

PERCEIVED DEMAND FOR A MONOPOLISTIC COMPETITOR

A monopolistically competitive firm perceives a demand for its goods that is an intermediate case between monopoly and 
competition. Figure 1 offers a reminder that the demand curve as faced by a perfectly competitive firm is perfectly 
elastic or flat, because the perfectly competitive firm can sell any quantity it wishes at the prevailing market price. 
In contrast, the demand curve, as faced by a monopolist, is the market demand curve, since a monopolist is the only 
firm in the market, and hence is downward sloping.
















Figure 1. Perceived Demand for Firms in Different Competitive Settings. The demand curve faced by a perfectly 
competitive firm is perfectly elastic, meaning it can sell all the output it wishes at the prevailing market price. The 
demand curve faced by a monopoly is the market demand. It can sell more output only by decreasing the price it charges. 
The demand curve faced by a monopolistically competitive firm falls in between.

The demand curve as faced by a monopolistic competitor is not flat, but rather downward-sloping, which means that the 
monopolistic competitor can raise its price without losing all of its customers

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   369

or lower the price and gain more customers. Since there are substitutes, the demand curve facing a monopolistically 
competitive firm is more elastic than that of a monopoly where there are no close substitutes.  If a monopolist raises 
its price, some consumers will choose not to purchase its prod- uct—but they will then need to buy a completely 
different product. However, when a monopolistic competitor raises its price, some consumers will choose not to purchase 
the product at all, but others will choose to buy a similar product from another firm. If a monopolistic competitor 
raises its price, it will not lose as many customers as would a perfectly competitive firm, but it will lose more 
customers than would a monopoly that raised its prices.

At a glance, the demand curves faced by a monopoly and by a monopolistic competitor look simi- lar—that is, they both 
slope down. But the underlying economic meaning of these perceived demand curves is different, because a monopolist 
faces the market demand curve and a monopolistic competi- tor does not. Rather, a monopolistically competitive firm’s 
demand curve is but one of many firms that make up the “before” market demand curve. Are you following? If so, how 
would you categorize the market for golf balls? Take a swing, then see the following Clear It Up feature.


ARE GOLF BALLS REALLY DIFFERENTIATED PRODUCTS?

Monopolistic competition refers to an industry that has more than a few firms, each offering a product which, from the 
consumer’s perspective, is different from its competitors. The U.S. Golf Association runs a laboratory that tests 
20,000 golf balls a year. There are strict rules for what makes a golf ball legal. The weight of a golf ball cannot 
exceed 1.620 ounces and its diameter cannot be less than 1.680 inches (which is a weight of 45.93 grams and a diameter 
of 42.67 millimeters, in case you were wondering). The balls are also tested by being hit at different speeds. For 
example, the distance test involves having a mechanical golfer hit the ball with a titanium driver and a swing speed of 
120 miles per hour. As the testing center explains: “The USGA system then uses an array of sensors that accurately 
measure the flight of a golf ball during a short, indoor trajectory from a ball launcher. From this flight data, a 
computer calculates the lift and drag forces that are gener- ated by the speed, spin, and dimple pattern of the ball. … 
The distance limit is 317 yards.”
Over 1800 golf balls made by more than 100 companies meet the USGA standards. The balls do differ in various ways, like 
the pattern of dimples on the ball, the types of plastic used on the cover and in the cores, and so on. Since all balls 
need to conform to the USGA tests, they are much more alike than different. In other words, golf ball manufacturers are 
monopo- listically competitive.
However, retail sales of golf balls are about $500 million per year, which means that a lot of large companies have a 
power- ful incentive to persuade players that golf balls are highly differentiated and that it makes a huge difference 
which one you choose. Sure, Tiger Woods can tell the difference. For the average duffer (golf-speak for a “mediocre 
player”) who plays a few times a summer—and who loses a lot of golf balls to the woods and lake and needs to buy new 
ones—most golf balls are pretty much indistinguishable.


HOW A MONOPOLISTIC COMPETITOR CHOOSES PRICE AND QUANTITY

The monopolistically competitive firm decides on its profit-maximizing quantity and price in much the same way as a 
monopolist. A monopolistic competitor, like a monopolist, faces a downward-slop- ing demand curve, and so it will 
choose some combination of price and quantity along its perceived demand curve.

As  an  example  of  a  profit-maximizing  monopolistic  competitor,  consider  the  Authentic  Chinese Pizza store, 
which serves pizza with cheese, sweet and sour sauce, and your choice of vegetables and meats. Although Authentic 
Chinese Pizza must compete against other pizza businesses and restau-

370                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


rants,  it  has  a  differentiated  product.  The  firm’s  perceived  demand  curve  is  downward  sloping,  as shown 
in Figure 2 and the first two columns of Table 1.





















Figure 2. How a Monopolistic Competitor Chooses its Profit Maximizing Output and Price. To max- imize profits, the 
Authentic Chinese Pizza shop would choose a quantity where marginal revenue equals marginal cost, or Q where MR = MC. 
Here it would choose a quantity of 40 and a price of $16.

Quantity   Price   Total Revenue   Marginal Revenue   Total Cost    Marginal Cost    Average Cost
10                 $23       $230                      –                                     $340              –        
                     $34
20                 $20       $400                      $17                                $400              $6          
                 $20
30                 $18       $540                      $14                                $480              $8          
                 $16
40                 $16       $640                      $10                                $580              $10         
               $14.50
50                 $14       $700                      $6                                   $700              $12       
                 $14
60                 $12       $720                      $2                                   $840              $14       
                 $14
70                 $10       $700                      –$2                                $1,020           $18          
              $14.57
80                 $8         $640                      –$6                                $1,280           $26         
               $16
Table 1. Revenue and Cost Schedule

The combinations of price and quantity at each point on the demand curve can be multiplied to calcu- late the total 
revenue that the firm would receive, which is shown in the third column of Table 1. The fourth column, marginal 
revenue, is calculated as the change in total revenue divided by the change in quantity. The final columns of Table 1 
show total cost, marginal cost, and average cost. As always, marginal cost is calculated by dividing the change in 
total cost by the change in quantity, while aver- age cost is calculated by dividing total cost by quantity. The 
following Work It Out feature shows how these firms calculate how much of its product to supply at what price.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   371





HOW A MONOPOLISTIC COMPETITOR DETERMINES HOW MUCH TO PRODUCE AND AT WHAT PRICE

The process by which a monopolistic competitor chooses its profit-maximizing quantity and price resembles closely how a 
monopoly makes these decisions process. First, the firm selects the profit-maximizing quantity to produce. Then the 
firm decides what price to charge for that quantity.
Step 1. The monopolistic competitor determines its profit-maximizing level of output. In this case, the Authentic 
Chinese Pizza company will determine the profit-maximizing quantity to produce by considering its marginal revenues and 
mar- ginal costs. Two scenarios are possible:

•    If the firm is producing at a quantity of output where marginal revenue exceeds marginal cost, then the firm 
should keep expanding production, because each marginal unit is adding to profit by bringing in more revenue than its 
cost. In this way, the firm will produce up to the quantity where MR = MC.
•    If the firm is producing at a quantity where marginal costs exceed marginal revenue, then each marginal unit is 
costing more than the revenue it brings in, and the firm will increase its profits by reducing the quantity of output 
until MR = MC.

In this example, MR and MC intersect at a quantity of 40, which is the profit-maximizing level of output for the firm.
Step 2. The monopolistic competitor decides what price to charge. When the firm has determined its profit-maximizing 
quantity of output, it can then look to its perceived demand curve to find out what it can charge for that quantity of 
output. On the graph, this process can be shown as a vertical line reaching up through the profit-maximizing quantity 
until it hits the firm’s perceived demand curve. For Authentic Chinese Pizza, it should charge a price of $16 per pizza 
for a quantity of 40.
Once the firm has chosen price and quantity, it’s in a position to calculate total revenue, total cost, and profit. At 
a quantity of 40, the price of $16 lies above the average cost curve, so the firm is making economic profits. From 
Table 1 we can see that, at an output of 40, the firm’s total revenue is $640 and its total cost is $580, so profits 
are $60. In Figure 2, the firm’s total revenues are the rectangle with the quantity of 40 on the horizontal axis and 
the price of $16 on the vertical axis. The firm’s total costs are the light shaded rectangle with the same quantity of 
40 on the horizontal axis but the average cost of $14.50 on the vertical axis. Profits are total revenues minus total 
costs, which is the shaded area above the average cost curve.

Although the process by which a monopolistic competitor makes decisions about quantity and price is similar to the way 
in which a monopolist makes such decisions, two differences are worth remem- bering.  First,  although  both  a  
monopolist  and  a  monopolistic  competitor  face  downward-sloping demand curves, the monopolist’s perceived demand 
curve is the market demand curve, while the per- ceived demand curve for a monopolistic competitor is based on the 
extent of its product differentia- tion and how many competitors it faces. Second, a monopolist is surrounded by 
barriers to entry and need not fear entry, but a monopolistic competitor who earns profits must expect the entry of 
firms with similar, but differentiated, products.

MONOPOLISTIC COMPETITORS AND ENTRY

If one monopolistic competitor earns positive economic profits, other firms will be tempted to enter the market. A gas 
station with a great location must worry that other gas stations might open across the street or down the road—and 
perhaps the new gas stations will sell coffee or have a carwash or some other attraction to lure customers. A 
successful restaurant with a unique barbecue sauce must be concerned that other restaurants will try to copy the sauce 
or offer their own unique recipes. A

372                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


laundry detergent with a great reputation for quality must be concerned that other competitors may seek to build their 
own reputations.

The entry of other firms into the same general market (like gas, restaurants, or detergent) shifts the demand  curve  
faced  by  a  monopolistically  competitive  firm.  As  more  firms  enter  the  market,  the quantity  demanded  at  a 
 given  price  for  any  particular  firm  will  decline,  and  the  firm’s  perceived demand curve will shift to the 
left. As a firm’s perceived demand curve shifts to the left, its marginal revenue curve will shift to the left, too. 
The shift in marginal revenue will change the profit-maximiz- ing quantity that the firm chooses to produce, since 
marginal revenue will then equal marginal cost at a lower quantity.

Figure 3 (a) shows a situation in which a monopolistic competitor was earning a profit with its origi- nal perceived 
demand curve (D0). The intersection of the marginal revenue curve (MR0) and marginal cost curve (MC) occurs at point S, 
corresponding to quantity Q0, which is associated on the demand curve at point T with price P0. The combination of 
price P0  and quantity Q0  lies above the average cost curve, which shows that the firm is earning positive economic 
profits.


















Figure 3. Monopolistic Competition, Entry, and Exit. (a) At P0  and Q0, the monopolistically competitive firm shown in 
this figure is making a positive economic profit. This is clear because if you follow the dotted line above Q0, you can 
see that price is above average cost. Positive economic profits attract competing firms to the indus- try, driving the 
original firm’s demand down to D1. At the new equilibrium quantity (P1, Q1), the original firm is earning zero economic 
profits, and entry into the industry ceases. In (b) the opposite occurs. At P0 and Q0, the firm is losing money. If you 
follow the dotted line above Q0, you can see that average cost is above price. Losses induce firms to leave the 
industry. When they do, demand for the original firm rises to D1, where once again the firm is earning zero economic 
profit.

Unlike a monopoly, with its high barriers to entry, a monopolistically competitive firm with positive economic profits 
will attract competition. When another competitor enters the market, the original firm’s perceived demand curve shifts 
to the left, from D0 to D1, and the associated marginal revenue curve shifts from MR0 to MR1. The new profit-maximizing 
output is Q1, because the intersection of

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   373

the MR1 and MC now occurs at point U. Moving vertically up from that quantity on the new demand curve, the optimal 
price is at P1.

As long as the firm is earning positive economic profits, new competitors will continue to enter the market, reducing 
the original firm’s demand and marginal revenue curves. The long-run equilibrium is shown in the figure at point Y, 
where the firm’s perceived demand curve touches the average cost curve. When price is equal to average cost, economic 
profits are zero. Thus, although a monopolisti- cally competitive firm may earn positive economic profits in the short 
term, the process of new entry will drive down economic profits to zero in the long run. Remember that zero economic 
profit is not equivalent to zero accounting profit. A zero economic profit means the firm’s accounting profit is equal 
to what its resources could earn in their next best use. Figure 3 (b) shows the reverse situation, where a 
monopolistically competitive firm is originally losing money. The adjustment to long-run equilibrium is analogous to 
the previous example. The economic losses lead to firms exiting, which will result  in increased  demand for this 
particular  firm, and consequently lower losses.  Firms exit up to the point where there are no more losses in this 
market, for example when the demand curve touches the average cost curve, as in point Z.

Monopolistic competitors can make an economic profit or loss in the short run, but in the long run, entry and exit will 
drive these firms toward a zero economic profit outcome. However, the zero eco- nomic  profit  outcome  in  
monopolistic  competition  looks  different  from  the  zero  economic  profit outcome in perfect competition in 
several ways relating both to efficiency and to variety in the mar- ket.

MONOPOLISTIC COMPETITION AND EFFICIENCY

The long-term result of entry and exit in a perfectly competitive market is that all firms end up selling at  the  
price  level  determined  by  the  lowest  point  on  the  average  cost  curve.  This  outcome  is  why perfect 
competition displays productive efficiency: goods are being produced at the lowest possible average cost. However, in 
monopolistic competition, the end result of entry and exit is that firms end up with a price that lies on the 
downward-sloping portion of the average cost curve, not at the very bottom of the AC curve. Thus, monopolistic 
competition will not be productively efficient.

In a perfectly competitive market, each firm produces at a quantity where price is set equal to mar- ginal cost, both 
in the short run and in the long run. This outcome is why perfect competition displays allocative efficiency: the 
social benefits of additional production, as measured by the marginal benefit, which is the same as the price, equal 
the marginal costs to society of that production. In a monopo- listically competitive market, the rule for maximizing 
profit is to set MR = MC—and price is higher than marginal revenue, not equal to it because the demand curve is 
downward sloping. When P > MC, which is the outcome in a monopolistically competitive market, the benefits to society 
of provid- ing additional quantity, as measured by the price that people are willing to pay, exceed the marginal costs 
to society of producing those units. A monopolistically competitive firm does not produce more, which means that 
society loses the net benefit of those extra units. This is the same argument we made about monopoly, but in this case 
to a lesser degree. Thus, a monopolistically competitive industry will produce a lower quantity of a good and charge a 
higher price for it than would a perfectly competitive industry. See the following Clear It Up feature for more detail 
on the impact of demand shifts.

374                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 




WHY DOES A SHIFT IN PERCEIVED DEMAND CAUSE A SHIFT IN MARGINAL REVENUE?

The combinations of price and quantity at each point on a firm’s perceived demand curve are used to calculate total 
revenue for each combination of price and quantity. This information on total revenue is then used to calculate 
marginal revenue, which is the change in total revenue divided by the change in quantity. A change in perceived demand 
will change total revenue at every quantity of output and in turn, the change in total revenue will shift marginal 
revenue at each quantity of output. Thus, when entry occurs in a monopolistically competitive industry, the perceived 
demand curve for each firm will shift to the left, because a smaller quantity will be demanded at any given price. 
Another way of interpreting this shift in demand is to notice that, for each quantity sold, a lower price will be 
charged. Consequently, the marginal revenue will be lower for each quantity sold—and the marginal revenue curve will 
shift to the left as well. Conversely, exit causes the per- ceived demand curve for a monopolistically competitive firm 
to shift to the right and the corresponding marginal revenue curve to shift right, too.

A  monopolistically  competitive  industry  does  not  display  productive  and  allocative  efficiency  in either the 
short run, when firms are making economic profits and losses, nor in the long run, when firms are earning zero profits.

THE BENEFITS OF VARIETY AND PRODUCT DIFFERENTIATION

Even  though  monopolistic  competition  does  not  provide  productive  efficiency  or  allocative  effi- ciency, it 
does have benefits of its own. Product differentiation is based on variety and innovation. Many people would prefer to 
live in an economy with many kinds of clothes, foods, and car styles; not in a world of perfect competition where 
everyone will always wear blue jeans and white shirts, eat only spaghetti with plain red sauce, and drive an identical 
model of car. Many people would prefer to live in an economy where firms are struggling to figure out ways of 
attracting customers by methods like friendlier service, free delivery, guarantees of quality, variations on existing 
products, and a better shopping experience.

Economists have struggled, with only partial success, to address the question of whether a market-ori- ented economy 
produces the optimal amount of variety. Critics of market-oriented economies argue that society does not really need 
dozens of different athletic shoes or breakfast cereals or automo- biles. They argue that much of the cost of creating 
such a high degree of product differentiation, and then of advertising and marketing this differentiation, is socially 
wasteful—that is, most people would be just as happy with a smaller range of differentiated products produced and sold 
at a lower price. Defenders of a market-oriented economy respond that if people do not want to buy differentiated 
products or highly advertised brand names, no one is forcing them to do so. Moreover, they argue that consumers benefit 
substantially when firms seek short-term profits by providing differentiated prod- ucts. This controversy may never be 
fully resolved, in part because deciding on the optimal amount of variety is very difficult, and in part because the 
two sides often place different values on what variety means for consumers. Read the following Clear It Up feature for 
a discussion on the role that adver- tising plays in monopolistic competition.


HOW DOES ADVERTISING IMPACT MONOPOLISTIC COMPETITION?

The U.S. economy spent about $180.12 billion on advertising in 2014, according to eMarketer.com. Roughly one third of 
this was television advertising, and another third was divided roughly equally between Internet, newspapers, and radio.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   375



The  remaining  third  was  divided  up  between  direct  mail,  magazines,  telephone  directory  yellow  pages,  and  
billboards. Mobile devices are increasing the opportunities for advertisers.
Advertising is all about explaining to people, or making people believe, that the products of one firm are 
differentiated from the products of another firm. In the framework of monopolistic competition, there are two ways to 
conceive of how advertising works: either advertising causes a firm’s perceived demand curve to become more inelastic 
(that is, it causes the perceived demand curve to become steeper); or advertising causes demand for the firm’s product 
to increase (that is, it causes the firm’s perceived demand curve to shift to the right). In either case, a successful 
advertising campaign may allow a firm to sell either a greater quantity or to charge a higher price, or both, and thus 
increase its profits.
However, economists and business owners have also long suspected that much of the advertising may only offset other 
advertising. Economist A. C. Pigou wrote the following back in 1920 in his book, The Economics of Welfare:
It may happen that expenditures on advertisement made by competing monopolists [that is, what we now call monopolistic 
competitors] will simply neutralise one another, and leave the industrial position exactly as it would have been if 
neither had expended anything. For, clearly, if each of two rivals makes equal efforts to attract the favour of the 
public away from the other, the total result is the same as it would have been if neither had made any effort at all.



KEY CONCEPTS AND SUMMARY

Monopolistic competition refers to a market where many firms sell differentiated products. Differen- tiated products 
can arise from characteristics of the good or service, location from which the product is sold, intangible aspects of 
the product, and perceptions of the product.

The perceived demand curve for a monopolistically competitive firm is downward-sloping, which shows that it is a price 
maker and chooses a combination of price and quantity. However, the per- ceived  demand  curve  for  a  monopolistic  
competitor  is  more  elastic  than  the  perceived  demand curve for a monopolist, because the monopolistic competitor 
has direct competition, unlike the pure monopolist. A profit-maximizing monopolistic competitor will seek out the 
quantity where marginal revenue is equal to marginal cost. The monopolistic competitor will produce that level of 
output and charge the price that is indicated by the firm’s demand curve.

If the firms in a monopolistically competitive industry are earning economic profits, the industry will attract entry 
until profits are driven down to zero in the long run. If the firms in a monopolistically competitive industry are 
suffering economic losses, then the industry will experience exit of firms until economic profits are driven up to zero 
in the long run.

A monopolistically competitive firm is not productively efficient because it does not produce at the minimum of its 
average cost curve. A monopolistically competitive firm is not allocatively efficient because it does not produce where 
P = MC, but instead produces where P > MC. Thus, a monopolis- tically competitive firm will tend to produce a lower 
quantity at a higher cost and to charge a higher price than a perfectly competitive firm.

Monopolistically competitive industries do offer benefits to consumers in the form of greater variety and incentives 
for improved products and services. There is some controversy over whether a market- oriented economy generates too 
much variety.

376                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 



SELF-CHECK QUESTIONS



1.    Suppose that, due to a successful advertising campaign, a monopolistic competitor experiences an increase in 
demand for its product. How will that affect the price it charges and the quantity it supplies?
2.    Continuing with the scenario outlined in question 1, in the long run, the positive economic profits earned by the 
monopolistic competitor will attract a response either from existing firms in the industry or firms outside. As those 
firms capture the original firm’s profit, what will happen to the original firm’s profit- maximizing price and output 
levels?



REVIEW QUESTIONS



1.    What is the relationship between product differentiation and monopolistic competition?
2.    How is the perceived demand curve for a monopolistically competitive firm different from the perceived demand 
curve for a monopoly or a perfectly competitive firm?
3.    How does a monopolistic competitor choose its profit-maximizing quantity of output and price?
4.    How can a monopolistic competitor tell whether the price it is charging will cause the firm to earn profits or 
experience losses?
5.    If the firms in a monopolistically competitive market are earning economic profits or losses in the short run, 
would you expect them to continue doing so in the long run? Why?
6.    Is a monopolistically competitive firm productively efficient? Is it allocatively efficient? Why or why not?




CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS



1.    Aside from advertising, how can monopolistically competitive firms increase demand for their products?
2.    Make a case for why monopolistically competitive industries never reach long-run equilibrium.
3.    Would you rather have efficiency or variety? That is, one opportunity cost of the variety of products we have is 
that each product costs more per unit than if there were only one kind of product of a given type, like shoes. Perhaps 
a better question is, “What is the right amount of variety? Can there be too many varieties of shoes, for example?”



PROBLEMS



Andrea’s Day Spa began to offer a relaxing aromatherapy treatment. The firm asks you how much to charge to maxi- mize 
profits. The demand curve for the treatments is given by the first two columns in Table 2; its total costs are given in 
the third column. For each level of output, calculate total revenue, marginal revenue, average cost, and marginal cost. 
What is the profit-maximizing level of output for the treatments and how much will the firm earn in profits?

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   377





Price       Quantity    TC

$25.00    0                   $130

$24.00    10                 $275

$23.00    20                 $435

$22.50    30                 $610

$22.00    40                 $800

$21.60    50                 $1,005

$21.20    60                 $1,225

Table 2.



REFERENCES

Kantar Media. “Our Insights: Infographic—U.S. Advertising Year End Trends Report 2012.” Accessed October   17,   2013.  
 http://kantarmedia.us/insight-center/reports/infographic-us-advertising-year- end-trends-report-2012.

Statistica.com.  2015.  “Number  of  Restaurants  in  the  United  States  from  2011  to  2014.”  Accessed March 27, 
2015. http://www.statista.com/statistics/244616/number-of-qsr-fsr-chain-independent- restaurants-in-the-us/.

GLOSSARY

differentiated product a product that is perceived by consumers as distinctive in some way imperfectly competitive 
firms and organizations that fall between the extremes of monopoly and perfect competition
monopolistic competition many firms competing to sell similar but differentiated products
oligopoly when a few large firms have all or most of the sales in an industry

SOLUTIONS



Answers to Self-Cfteck Questions

1.    An increase in demand will manifest itself as a rightward shift in the demand curve, and a rightward shift in 
marginal revenue. The shift in marginal revenue will cause a movement up the marginal cost curve to the new 
intersection between MR and MC at a higher level of output. The new price can be read by drawing a line up from the new 
output level to the new demand curve, and then over to the vertical axis. The new price should be higher. The increase 
in quantity will cause a movement along the average cost curve to a possibly higher level of average cost. The price, 
though, will increase more, causing an increase in total profits.
2.    As long as the original firm is earning positive economic profits, other firms will respond in ways that take 
away the original firm’s profits. This will manifest itself as a decrease in demand for the original firm’s product, a 
decrease in the firm’s profit-maximizing price and a decrease in the firm’s profit-maximizing

378                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 



level of output, essentially unwinding the process described in the answer to question 1. In the long-run equilibrium, 
all firms in monopolistically competitive markets will earn zero economic profits.
