


INTRODUCTION  TO  GLOBALIZATION  AND  TRADE  FROM  A PLURALISTIC  PERSPECTIVE



CHAPTER OBJECTIVES



In this chapter, you will learn about:

•    Review the Orthodox Economics Comparative Advantage and Trade Story.

•    Examine Critiques of Orthodox Free Trade Story.

•    Identify an Alternative Approach for Evaluating the Impact of International Trade.



n Ch. 20: Globalization and Protectionism several concerns associated with free trade are tackled and, presumably, 
debunked.  In 20.2 International Trade and Its Effects on Jobs, Wages, and Work- ing Conditions, three issues are 
raised.

1.   Fewer Jobs?
2.   Trade and Wages
3.   Labor Standards and Working Conditions

In 20.3 Arguments in Support of Restricting Imports, another five issues are tackled.

1.   Infant Industry Argument
2.   Anti-Dumping
3.   Environmental Protection
4.   Low Foreign Wages
5.   National Interest Argument

But, are these issues really non-starters?  Does orthodox economics effectively minimize the above outlined issues?  
From the standpoint of heterodox economists, the answer to both of these questions is no.  There is a significant body 
of research available, within the context of a more pluralistic tra- ditions in economics, that point to other 
interpretations of international trade in which the standard orthodox economic free trade story has very real 
weaknesses.

The intention of this section is to provide a counter-perspective to that of the orthodox comparative advantage story.  
The critique is directed toward the orthodox presentation of its theoretical ideas, specifically how orthodox theory 
promotes the merits and benefits of free trade.  The critique will take two forms.  The first and primary criticism 
will focus on the wide array of ways in the orthodox theoretical story fails as both a technical and functional 
theoretical presentation.  The second element

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   795
of  criticism  will,  in  periodic  instances,  include  references  to  history  as  well  as  empirical  evidence to 
document instances in which the orthodox comparative advantage story appears to not fulfill its claims.



28.  1  THE  ORTHODOX  STORY  OF  TRADE:  A  SYNOPSIS



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Define the term comparative advantage.

•    Explain the terms and conditions of trade from an orthodox economic perspective.



f ever there was a sacrosanct idea within orthodox economic thought, it is the belief, faith even, that orthodox 
economists have regarding the merits and benefits of economic actors being free to trade.  The basis for the orthodox 
economists’ faith has much to do with the theoretical explana- tion orthodox economists utilize to explain how trade 
works and why it is beneficial.  Consider the
ideas presented in the chapter entitled International Trade.

As presented, orthodox economics  organizes its free trade story around several assumptions.  The assumptions are 
designed to constrain the scope of the analysis so as to simplify the story.  In the typ- ical introductory textbook 
presentation, orthodox economists utilize production possibilities fron- tiers to depict their story.

In  support  of  the  production  possibilities  frontier  presentation,  orthodox  economists  apply  eight 
assumptions.  The following represents the eight, most common, assumptions.

1.   Two producers
2.   Two products
3.   Fixed resources.
4.   Fixed technology.
5.   Full resource utilization.
6.   Zero transactions costs
7.   No external costs or benefits
8.   Autarky

Let’s take a moment to reflect upon these assumptions and what they mean.  For starters, it is typically to assume that 
the two producers in the model will be countries.  Within the two countries, only two products will be produced.  Each 
country will have a fixed number of resources available to produce those products.  Limited resources will subsequently 
limit the amount of production of the two prod- ucts that is possible within the two countries.  Additionally, the 
fixed technology assumption further limits the extent of possible production.  Given the limits to production, all 
resources and technology are assumed to be used, fully utilized, meaning that production will take place at some point 
on the

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   797

production possibilities frontier.  Once products are produced, if the two countries seek to trade with one another, 
there will be no transactions costs associated with trade.  Transactions costs are costs such as the legal costs of 
creating contracts or the transportation costs associated  with shipping  a product from one part of the world to 
another.  In addition to no transactions costs, external costs or benefits are assumed to be absent.  As a reminder, 
external costs or benefits are the possible spillover effects that occur as a result of economic activity such as 
production or consumption.  As one can imagine, because trade requires transportation, the social costs associated with 
the wastes generated by transportation are very real.  However, for the sake of simplicity, the model assumes the costs 
and/ or benefits of externalities are zero.  Finally, autarky means that each producer is self-sufficient.  Self- 
sufficient producers do not require trade in order to survive.  If trade is a luxury rather than a neces- sity, then 
when trade occurs it is voluntary trade and only to the benefit of the trading partners.

Given the model’s assumptions, the orthodox free trade story then showcases three essential compo- nents to the trade 
story.  First, the initial step in facilitating trade is for producers to identify their comparative advantage.  
Recall, comparative advantage means that producers are capable of produc- ing some product(s) at a lower opportunity 
cost than another producer is capable of producing the same product(s).  As a producer, regardless of whether the 
producer is an individual, firm, or nation, as long as the producer is producing the product at a lower opportunity 
cost than the other producer, the producer with the lower opportunity cost has a comparative advantage.  The second 
step in the trade story is the specialization of production.  Upon identifying its comparative advantage, orthodox 
economics argues that a producer should specialize in the production of the product that which it has a comparative 
advantage.  Specialization means that a producer should direct their available resources toward the production of a 
specific product.  The third component of the trade story is, trade.  Spe- cialized producers, producing a product of 
which they have a comparative advantage, should now seek to identify trading partners that are also specialized 
producers of desirable products.

1                    →                        2                           →                3

Producer                              Producer Specializes in                   Trade with Identifies its               
          the Production                                 other Producers Comparative                        of the 
Comparatively                       of other Advantage                            Advantageous Product                  
 Products


THE BENEFITS OF TRADE

Orthodox economics sees the outcomes of trade as having predominantly positive impacts for the economic well-being of 
those people participating in the trade.  Trade is deemed beneficial for several reasons.  Orthodox economics concludes 
that trade will not only stimulate economic growth, increase efficiency, and enhance economic development, but that 
trade is also the best path toward pursuing those goals.

The  story  of  growth  is  relatively  straightforward.   The  economic  growth,  when  examined  more specifically, 
such as in the case of international trade as producers get access to consumers beyond their domestic borders, the 
number of available consumers should grow.  In the face of a larger poten-

798                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


tial consumer market place, domestic producers will seek to expand their productive capacities, oth- erwise known as 
growth, in order to produce more in an effort to take advantage of having more potential consumers.

The  story  of  efficiency  is  less  obvious,  but  is  still  relatively  straightforward,  particularly  if  viewed 
through the lens of international trade.  In an international trade environment, producers that may have  otherwise  
been  subject  to  their  own  country’s  domestic  competition,  are  now  confronted  by international competition.  
Given more competition, producers are forced to seek ever more efficient ways to produce products or risk being driven 
out of business.  More trade equates to more competi- tion and, through the eyes of an orthodox economist,

Finally, in the case of the economic development story, the relationship between trade and develop- ment is a bit murky 
but still evident.  By focusing on the specialized production product(s) that pro- ducers are comparatively good at 
producing, the total amount of available products should grow.  As two or more parties trade, each producer’s relative 
abundance of production becomes available to more people to be consumed.  Essentially, with the growth of products 
comes an increased ability to meet people’s wants.  As more wants are met, facilitated by trade, the sum total of 
utility grows for all and everyone is made better off.  In this case, economic development is being defined as raised 
living standards by virtue of access to consumer products.



28.  2  A  CRITICAL  EXAMINATION  OF  THE  ORTHODOX  DEPICTION OF  FREE  TRADE



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Explain ways in which the Orthodox Economic Trade story is limited as a technique for analyzing trade.

•    Define the different types of technical critiques of the orthodox free trade model

•    Explain that critiques of the orthodox free trade model are of differing severity.

•    Analyze applied examples of the limitations of the orthodox economic model.



ithin the discipline of economics not all economists agree with the rather rosy picture pre- sented by orthodox 
economists in their defense of free trade.  Critiques of the orthodox free trade story tend to focus on two areas.  
Some heterodox economists emphasize what they
see as the theoretical failures of the orthodox story, namely its disassociation with the “real world.” Other heterodox 
economists focus their criticisms toward the orthodoxy’s depiction of the outcomes of  trade,  particularly  the  
orthodoxy’s  conclusion  that  trade  stimulates  economic  growth  and  eco- nomic development

Upon examination it can be argued that both paths of criticism really represent the two different sides of the same 
coin.  For example, if the theoretical model presented by orthodox economics is, in fact, inaccurate because it is in 
some way divorced of “real world” context, then the theoretical conclu- sions drawn by the theory will likely also be 
flawed.  Looked at the other way, if “real world” evidence points to outcomes different from the outcomes predicted or 
perceived by orthodox economics, then it stands to reason that the theoretical model utilized to predict outcomes is 
failing in some capacity.

In the following sub-sections each of the two critical paths will be explored.  The careful reader will note that the 
two paths frequently intersect.


28. 2.1 TECHNICAL CRITIQUES: THE ORTHODOX MODEL IS POORLY CONSTRUCTED

In this section  of the chapter we will  explore the model  imperfections  approach to critiquing the orthodox 
presentation of free trade.  The model imperfections critique is, essentially, a failure of the techniques employed by 
orthodox economists.  There are two main types of model imperfections.

1.   Type One – Mild

800                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


2.   Type Two – More Severe to Very Severe

For Type I critics of the orthodox economic free trade story, the shortcomings associated with the orthodox economic 
presentation of free trade is strictly the result of a failure of technique, but not necessarily  a  failure  of  the  
overall  theory.    In  other  words,  the  theory  does  generalize  to  the  real world, but due to model 
imperfections such as the model’s choice of assumptions being overly simpli- fied, the model is unable to fully capture 
actual real world circumstances.  The degree of seriousness associated with these critiques can be classified as mild.

For Type II critics, the model imperfections critique represents a much more serious indictment of the standard 
orthodox free trade story.  In this case, comparative advantage, specialization, and trade does not actually generalize 
well to the real world.  The socially positive results that are depicted in the orthodox theoretical presentation, when 
these imperfections are accounted for, will not emerge. In other words, because the real world will, and does, contain 
imperfections that do not conform to the orthodox economic model, the orthodox theoretical presentation will often 
deviate from actual events in the real world causing the model to blatantly misrepresent the benefits of trade.   
Impor- tantly, with modifications designed to correct the imperfections, the model can be corrected enough so as to 
reflect conditions in the real world.


BREAKOUT BOX – A NOTE ON THE FAILURE OF TECHNIQUE


A failure of technique means that by making alterations to the choice of assumptions, the comparative advantage story 
can be modified to present theoretical outcomes that are more accurate to the real world.  As a general rule the 
changes in assumptions are applied on an ad hoc basis, meaning that assumptions are altered from situation to 
situation.  The goal becomes to modify assumptions in order to reflect phenomena experienced in the actual global 
economy.  The modifica- tion of assumptions suggests that there are limits to the usefulness of the techniques utilized 
within orthodox economic theory to explain.






TYPE I MODEL IMPERFECTIONS

The following represent examples of instances in which the restrictive features of the assumptions do not provide a 
“real world” depiction, but also do not fundamentally undermine the free trade story.

EXCLUSION OF TRANSACTIONS COSTS

In  constructing their theoretical  presentation  of international  trade, orthodox economics  excludes transactions 
costs.  Transactions costs include factors such as transportation, legal, and communica- tions costs.  As one can 
imagine, in the actual world in which we live the trade of products will seem- ingly always include significant 
transaction costs.  When transactions costs are included some trades that would have otherwise been beneficial will not 
be worthwhile as the costs associated with making the trade become too high to justify the trade.  While this critique 
certainly does point to instances in which some trades will not happen as would be the case in the standard orthodox 
trade story, the critique is not a deal breaker as most of the orthodox trade story remains intact.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   801

NON-LINEAR PRODUCTION POSSIBILITIES FRONTIERS

Production possibilities curves are not linear (straight line) but rather concave (bowed outward).  A bowed outward PPF 
reflects the principle of increasing opportunity cost.  Increasing opportunity cost implies that as a nation moves 
closer and closer to specializing in the production of one good or one type of good, the opportunity cost of 
specialization will rise. For example, for countries producing agricultural commodities, there tend to be land or 
ecology limits on their productive capacity.  As a result, to specialize in an agricultural product and then expanding 
production in an agricultural pro- ducing sector may cause there to be an increase in the average cost of production 
due to declining productivity associated with the diseconomies of scale that accompanies introduction of less and less 
fertile land.

Since the free trade story is told on the basis of comparative advantage such that a nation produces those  goods  that 
 require  a  low  opportunity  cost  of  production,  if  opportunity costs  are  changing (specifically, rising), then 
production of a good that may have a low opportunity cost at one point, may have a significantly higher opportunity 
cost after specialization.  The following table illustrates this point.



CANADA
SILVER (OUNCES)                    0                    500,000       600,000

LUMBER (BOARD – FEET)    1,000,000    500,000       0
1l : 1S           1l : 0.2S
1S : 1L          1S : 5L


MEXICO
SILVER (OUNCES)                    0                    40,000          80,000

LUMBER (BOARD – FEET)    80,000         50,000          0
1L : 1.33S    1L : 0.8S
1S : 0.75L    1S : 1.25L

The ratios in red illustrate the lowest opportunity costs of production for both Canada and Mexico. For  Canada,  the  
numbers  indicate  that  they  have  a  comparative  advantage  in  producing  lumber because they can produce 1 unit 
of lumber at the expense of only 0.2 units of silver.  Canada’s com- parative advantage outcome emerges when Canadian 
production changes from 0 lumber and 600,000 silver to 500,000 lumber and 500,000 silver.  For Mexico, the numbers 
indicate that they have a com- parative advantage in producing silver because they are capable of producing 1 unit of 
silver for 0.75 units of lumber.  Mexico’s comparative advantage emerges when Mexican production changes from 0 silver 
and 80,000 lumber to 40,000 silver and 40,000 lumber.

According to the logic of orthodox economic theory, now that the Canadian and Mexican compar- ative advantages have 
been identified, with Canada having the advantage in lumber and Mexico the advantage in silver, Mexico and Canada 
should then specialize and trade.  Specialization means that Canada should now only produce lumber, moving their 
production outcome to 0 silver and 1,000,000

802                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


lumber  while  Mexico  should  now  only  produce  silver,  moving  their  production  to  0  lumber  and 80,000 
silver.  It is at this point that a problem appears.  Once each country specializes, what was a comparative advantage 
dissolves into a comparative disadvantage.

Examining the table, as a result of the principle of increasing opportunity cost, the opportunity cost in silver of 
specializing in lumber increases as Canada moves to maximum lumber production becom- ing a 1 lumber to 1 silver ratio.  
Mexico experiences as similar problem except theirs is the problem of a rising opportunity cost associated with forgone 
lumber.  For Mexico the ratio changes to 1 silver for 1.25 lumber (which is also 1 lumber for 0.8 silver).  In fact, as 
is demonstrated by this table, once the country’s specialize, each country now has a comparative advantage in the 
opposite product from what it previously had a comparative advantage.  Post-specialization, Mexico is now capable of 
pro- ducing lumber at a lower opportunity cost than Canada and Canada is now able to produce silver at a lower 
opportunity cost than Mexico.  Clearly the orthodox economic story does not fit this circum- stance.  This is not to 
say that free trade necessarily breaks down as a result of this scenario, but it does demonstrate that in a more 
realistic setting, specialization and trade are not appropriate.  In fact, one thing the table clearly demonstrates is 
that both countries are better off producing a combination, a diversity, of products.  At this point, based on a 
diversity of products produced, if the countries trade, then trade will allow both countries to acquire even more of 
the respective product that they do not have a comparative advantage in producing.


TYPE II MODEL IMPERFECTIONS

The following examples provide an overview of some of the Type II imperfections that appear to gen- erate a divide 
between real, actual, world circumstances and the orthodox economic trade story.  Each imperfection represents a more 
fundamental challenge to the orthodox model of trade than did the Type I imperfections.  As such, the imperfections are 
presented from least significant to most signifi- cant in terms of their implications for the orthodox model.

SPECIALIZATION AND ECONOMIC VULNERABILITY

Any time production becomes highly specialized, the producer confronts potential risks.  Here are two potential risks 
associated with specialization.

1.   Any country that chooses to completely specialize in the production of one product runs the risk of a decline in 
the market for the specialized good.  For example, consider a circumstance in which consumers lose interest in the 
product.  In this case market demand declines and the country specializing in the production of this product will 
necessarily suffers significant economic damage.

2. Any country that specializes in the production of an agricultural good, beyond losses in consumer demand also face 
production risks.  A change in weather or a natural disaster has the poten-
tial to                      completely undermine the economy of the nation(s) producing the single agricul- tural 
product and                 devastate an economy.

In either of the above stated situations, the orthodox economic advice of specialization and trade has the potential to 
cause negative, not positive effects, for the participants.  Clearly there are potentially economically devastating 
risks associated with a program of rigid specialization.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   803

Although the issue of risks does present a more pressing critique of the standard orthodox free trade story, because 
potential risks are not definite risks, absent the emergence of these events, the ortho- dox free trade story is still 
applicable.  Additionally, if the above stated risks are a concern, one can argue that the orthodox model can alter its 
assumptions to acknowledge heightened risks and, subse- quently, advocate for more diversified economies.  Diversified 
economies can still trade and, within the orthodox economic story, these economies would still be encouraged to open 
their borders to the free flow of products.

SPECIALIZATION AND LESS THAN FULL EMPLOYMENT

While the orthodox economic free trade story presents the idea that trade may produce increases in available goods and 
services to the trading partners, as a nation or nations specializes the industries suffering from a comparative 
disadvantage will, ultimately, displace laborers.  Because the losses in one industry may not be fully compensated in 
another industry or industries, more laborers may be displaced than necessarily employed, thus causing unemployment.

An example of the above situation, consider the trading situation of two countries where one country has  an  abundance 
 of  labor  and  the  other  country  has  an  abundance  of  capital  (tools,  equipment, machinery).  In the country 
that tends to have an abundance of labor the firms within that country would tend to use a lot of labor, and less 
capital, for their production.  In the country that tends to have an abundance of capital, the firms within the capital 
intensive country will tend to use a lot of capital, rather than labor, in their production processes.

According to orthodox economic theory, in identifying their respective comparative advantages, the labor intensive 
country would determine that it has a comparative advantage in producing products that require a lot of labor while the 
capital intensive country would find that it has an advantage in producing products that require a lot of tools, 
equipment and machinery.   The challenge that emerges in this situation is that not all firms in the capital intensive 
country will be capital intensive producers, some will be labor intensive producers.  The labor intensive firms in the 
capital intensive country will discover that they are at a comparative disadvantage against labor intensive producers 
from the labor intensive country.  The resulting outcome will be that the labor intensive firms, with an abundance of 
labor, from the capital intensive country, will begin laying off workers.  At the same time, while the capital 
intensive firms in the capital intensive country will likely grow and expand with trade, thus hiring more laborers, it 
is likely that their hiring will be less than the number of layoffs from the labor intensive firms.  In summary, 
because the firm using a lot of machines tends to use capital rather than labor for its production the number of 
laborers it absorbs will likely be less than the number of work- ers the labor intensive firm fires.  The overall 
outcome would be a rise in unemployment in the capital intensive country.

In this instance, the increase in unemployment being described would imply that trading countries will frequently not 
be operating at their maximum point of productive possibilities.  The notion of less than full employment is a concept 
that is, more often than not, the case across the entire global economy.  The evidence of less than full employment is 
overwhelming.  For example, over the last three decades (as global free trade policies and agreements have expanded, 
not contracted) unemploy- ment rates across countries identified as economically advanced and developed (countries such 
as the United States, Canada, Japan, Germany, France, the United Kingdom, Australia, Sweden, and others), unemployment 
rates have ranged from between a low of 3% to as high as 25%.  Additionally, in the rest of world, where the majority 
of the global population resides the absolute number of unemployed

804                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


or underemployed laborers exceeds 1 billion people.  Clearly less than full employment is the norm, not the exception.

A  less  than  full  employment  outcome  undermines  the  standard  orthodox  free  trade  story  because countries at 
less than full employment can produce more of any two products while opportunity costs are zero.  In the case of less 
than full employment, determine a comparative advantage is impossible because both products reflect the lowest possible 
opportunity cost, zero.  In a circumstance such as this, the orthodox free trade story is not capable of explaining the 
very real world situation of trade under conditions of less than full employment.  Correcting the model to account for 
this imperfection would require that the model assume that an action will be taken to push the economy back to full 
employment.  Such actions could include government (public) policy measures designed to alleviate the unemployment that 
emerges as a result of trade.  Even for many orthodox economists acknowl- edging the less than full employment scenario 
is a justification for government action to mitigate the negative consequences associated with trade.
