


INTRODUCTION  TO  GLOBALIZATION  AND  PROTECTIONISM






























FIgure 1. Flat Screen Competition. The market for flat-panel displays in the United States is huge. The manufac- turers 
of flat screens in the United States must compete against manufacturers from around the world. (Credit: modification of 
work by “Jemimus”/Flickr Creative Commons)


WHAT’S THE DOWNSIDE OF PROTECTION?

Governments are motivated to limit and alter market outcomes for political or social ends. While governments can limit 
the rise in prices of some products, they cannot control how much people want to buy or how much firms are willing to 
sell. The laws of demand and supply still hold. Trade policy is an example where regulations can redirect economic 
forces, but it cannot stop them from manifesting themselves elsewhere.
Flat-panel displays, the displays for laptop computers, tablets, and flat screen televisions, are an example of such an 
endur- ing principle. In the early 1990s, the vast majority of flat-panel displays used in U.S.-manufactured laptops 
were imported, primarily from Japan. The small but politically powerful U.S. flat-panel-display industry filed a 
dumping complaint with the Commerce Department. They argued that Japanese firms were selling displays at “less than 
fair value,” which made it difficult for U.S. firms to compete. This argument for trade protection is referred to as 
anti-dumping. Other arguments for protection in this complaint included national security. After a preliminary 
determination by the Commerce Department that the Japanese firms were dumping, the U.S. International Trade Commission 
imposed a 63% dumping margin (or tax)

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   753



on the import of flat-panel displays. Was this a successful exercise of U.S. trade policy? See what you think after 
reading the chapter.


CHAPTER OBJECTIVES


Introduction to Globalization and Protectionism
In this chapter, you will learn about:

•    Protectionism: An Indirect Subsidy from Consumers to Producers

•    International Trade and Its Effects on Jobs, Wages, and Working Conditions

•    Arguments in Support of Restricting Imports

•    How Trade Policy Is Enacted: Globally, Regionally, and Nationally

•    The Tradeoffs of Trade Policy



The world has become more connected on multiple levels, especially economically. In 1970, imports and exports made up 
11% of U.S. GDP, while now they make up 32%. However, the United States, due to its size, is less internationally 
connected than most countries. For example, according to the World Bank, 97% of Botswana’s economic activity is 
connected to trade. This chapter explores trade policy—the laws and strategies a country uses to regulate international 
trade. This topic is not with- out controversy.

As the world has become more globally connected, firms and workers in high-income countries like the United States, 
Japan, or the nations of the European Union, perceive a competitive threat from firms in medium-income countries like 
Mexico, China, or South Africa, that have lower costs of living and therefore pay lower wages. Firms and workers in 
low-income countries fear that they will suf- fer if they must compete against more productive workers and advanced 
technology in high-income countries.

On a different tack, some environmentalists worry that multinational firms may evade environmental protection laws by 
moving their production to countries with loose or nonexistent pollution stan- dards, trading a clean environment for 
jobs. Some politicians worry that their country may become overly dependent on key imported products, like oil, which 
in a time of war could threaten national security.  All  of  these  fears  influence  governments  to  reach  the  same 
 basic  policy  conclusion:  to protect national interests, whether businesses, jobs, or security, imports of foreign 
products should be restricted. This chapter analyzes such arguments. First, however, it is essential to learn a few key 
concepts and understand how the demand and supply model applies to international trade.



27.1  PROTECTIONISM:  AN  INDIRECT  SUBSIDY  FROM CONSUMERS  TO  PRODUCERS



LEARNING OBJECTIVES



By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•    Explain protectionism and its three main forms

•    Analyze protectionism through concepts of demand and supply, noting its effects on equilibrium

•    Calculate the effects of trade barriers



hen a government legislates policies to reduce or block international trade it is engaging in protectionism. 
Protectionist policies often seek to shield domestic producers and domestic workers  from  foreign  competition.  
Protectionism  takes  three  main  forms:  tariffs,  import
quotas, and nontariff barriers.

Recall from International Trade that tariffs are taxes imposed on imported goods and services. They make  imports  more 
 expensive  for  consumers,  discouraging  imports.  For  example,  in  recent  years large, flat-screen televisions 
imported from China have faced a 5% tariff rate.

Another way to control trade is through import quotas, which are numerical limitations on the quan- tity of products 
that can be imported. For instance, during the early 1980s, the Reagan Administra- tion imposed a quota on the import 
of Japanese automobiles. In the 1970s, many developed countries, including  the United States, found themselves with 
declining textile industries.  Textile  production does not require highly skilled workers, so producers were able to 
set up lower-cost factories in devel- oping countries. In order to “manage” this loss of jobs and income, the developed 
countries estab- lished an international Multifiber Agreement that essentially divided up the market for textile 
exports between importers and the remaining domestic producers. The agreement, which ran from 1974 to 2004, specified 
the exact quota of textile imports that each developed country would accept from each low-income country. A similar 
story exists for sugar imports into the United States, which are still governed by quotas.

Nontariff barriers are all the other ways that a nation can draw up rules, regulations, inspections, and paperwork to 
make it more costly or difficult to import products. A rule requiring certain safety standards can limit imports just 
as effectively as high tariffs or low import quotas, for instance. There are also nontariff barriers in the form of 
“rules-of-origin” regulations- these rules describe the “Made in Country X” label as the one in which the last 
substantial change in the product took place. A manu- facturer wishing to evade import restrictions may try to change 
the production process so that the last

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   755

big change in the product happens in his or her own country. For example, certain textiles are made in the United 
States, shipped to other countries, combined with textiles made in those other countries to make apparel—and then 
re-exported back to the United States for a final assembly, to escape paying tariffs or to obtain a “Made in the USA” 
label.

Despite import quotas, tariffs, and nontariff barriers, the share of apparel sold in the United States that is imported 
rose from about half in 1999 to about three-quarters today. The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), estimated the 
number of U.S. jobs in textiles and apparel fell from 666,360 in 2007 to 385,240 in 2012, a 42% decline. Even more U.S. 
textile industry jobs would have been lost with- out tariffs, however, domestic jobs that are saved by import quotas 
come at a cost. Because textile and apparel protectionism adds to the costs of imports, consumers end up paying 
billions of dollars more for clothing each year.

When the United States eliminates trade barriers in one area, consumers spend the money they save on that product 
elsewhere in the economy—so there is no overall loss of jobs for the economy as a whole. Of course, workers in some of 
the poorest countries of the world who would otherwise have jobs producing textiles, would gain considerably if the 
United States reduced its barriers to trade in textiles. That said, there are good reasons to be wary about reducing 
barriers to trade. The 2012 and 2013 Bangladeshi fires in textile factories, which resulted in a horrific loss of life, 
present complica- tions that our simplified analysis in the chapter will not capture.

Realizing  the  compromises  between  nations  that  come  about  due  to  trade  policy,  many  countries came  
together  in  1947  to  form  the  General  Agreement  on  Tariffs  and  Trade  (GATT).  (We’ll  cover the  GATT  in  
more  detail  later  in  the  chapter.)  This  agreement  has  since  been  superseded  by  the World Trade 
Organization (WTO), whose membership includes about 150 nations and most of the economies of the world. It is the 
primary international mechanism through which nations negotiate their trade rules—including rules about tariffs, 
quotas, and nontariff barriers. The next section exam- ines the results of such protectionism and develops a simple 
model to show the impact of trade policy.

DEMAND AND SUPPLY ANALYSIS OF PROTECTIONISM

To the non-economist, restricting imports may appear to be nothing more than taking sales from for- eign producers and 
giving them to domestic producers. Other factors are at work, however, because firms do not operate in a vacuum. 
Instead, firms sell their products either to consumers or to other firms (if they are business suppliers), who are also 
affected by the trade barriers. A demand and supply analysis of protectionism shows that it is not just a matter of 
domestic gains and foreign losses, but a policy that imposes substantial domestic costs as well.

Consider two countries, Brazil and the United States, who produce sugar. Each country has a domes- tic supply and 
demand for sugar, as detailed in Table 1 and illustrated in Figure 1. In Brazil, without trade, the equilibrium price 
of sugar is 12 cents per pound and the equilibrium output is 30 tons. When there is no trade in the United States, the 
equilibrium price of sugar is 24 cents per pound and the equilibrium quantity is 80 tons. These equilibrium points are 
labeled with the point E.

756                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 






















Figure 1. The Sugar Trade between Brazil and the United States. Before trade, the equilibrium price of sugar in Brazil 
is 12 cents a pound and for 24 cents per pound in the United States. When trade is allowed, businesses will buy cheap 
sugar in Brazil and sell it in the United States. This will result in higher prices in Brazil and lower prices in the 
United States. Ignoring transaction costs, prices should converge to 16 cents per pound, with Brazil exporting 15 tons 
of sugar and the United States importing 15 tons of sugar. If trade is only partly open between the countries, it will 
lead to an outcome between the free-trade and no-trade possibilities.

Tfte Sugar Trade between Brazil and tfte United States


Price      Brazil: Quantity Supplied (tons)

Brazil: Quantity Demanded (tons)

U.S.: Quantity Supplied (tons)

U.S.: Quantity Demanded (tons)

8
cents
12
cents
14
cents
16
cents
20
cents
24
cents
28
cents

20                                                  35                                                      60          
                                     100

30                                                  30                                                      66          
                                     93

35                                                  28                                                      69          
                                     90

40                                                  25                                                      72          
                                     87

45                                                  21                                                      76          
                                     83

50                                                  18                                                      80          
                                     80

55                                                  15                                                      82          
                                     78
Table 1. The Sugar Trade between Brazil and the United States

If  international  trade  between  Brazil  and  the  United  States  now  becomes  possible,  profit-seeking firms will 
spot an opportunity: buy sugar cheaply in Brazil, and sell it at a higher price in the United States. As sugar is 
shipped from Brazil to the United States, the quantity of sugar produced in Brazil will  be  greater  than  Brazilian  
consumption  (with  the  extra  production  being  exported),  and  the amount produced in the United States will be 
less than the amount of U.S. consumption (with the extra consumption being imported). Exports to the United States will 
reduce the supply of sugar in

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   757
Brazil, raising its price. Imports into the United States will increase the supply of sugar, lowering its price. When 
the price of sugar is the same in both countries, there is no incentive to trade further. As Figure 1 shows, the 
equilibrium with trade occurs at a price of 16 cents per pound. At that price, the sugar farmers of Brazil supply a 
quantity of 40 tons, while the consumers of Brazil buy only 25 tons.
The extra 15 tons of sugar production, shown by the horizontal gap between the demand curve and the supply curve in 
Brazil,  is exported  to the United States. In the United States, at a price of 16 cents, the farmers produce a 
quantity of 72 tons and consumers demand a quantity of 87 tons. The excess demand of 15 tons by American consumers, 
shown by the horizontal gap between demand and domestic supply at the price of 16 cents, is supplied by imported sugar. 
Free trade typically results in income distribution effects, but the key is to recognize the overall gains from trade, 
as shown in Fig- ure 2. Building on the concepts outlined in Demand and Supply and Demand, Supply, and Efficiency in 
terms of consumer and producer surplus, Figure 2 (a) shows that producers in Brazil gain by selling more sugar at a 
higher price, while Figure 2 (b) shows consumers in the United States benefit from the lower price and greater 
availability of sugar. Consumers in Brazil are worse off (compare their no- trade consumer surplus with the free-trade 
consumer surplus) and U.S. producers of sugar are worse off. There are gains from trade—an increase in social surplus 
in each country. That is, both the United States and Brazil are better off than they would be without trade. The 
following Clear It Up feature explains how trade policy can influence low-income countries.























Figure 2. Free Trade of Sugar. Free trade results in gains from trade. Total surplus increases in both countries. 
However, there are clear income distribution effects.

Visit this website to read more about the global sugar trade.

758                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 
















WHY ARE THERE LOW-INCOME COUNTRIES?

Why are the poor countries of the world poor? There are a number of reasons, but one of them will surprise you: the 
trade policies of the high-income countries. Following is a stark review of social priorities which has been widely 
publicized by the international aid organization, Oxfam International.
Higft-income  countries  of  the  world—primarily  the  United  States,  Canada,  countries  of  the  European  Union,  
and
Japan—subsidize their domestic farmers collectively by about $360 billion per year. By contrast, the total amount of 
foreign aid from these same high-income countries to the poor countries of the world is about $70 billion per year, or 
less than 20% of the farm subsidies. Why does this matter?
It matters because the support of farmers in high-income countries is devastating to the livelihoods of farmers in low-
income countries. Even when their climate and land are well-suited to products like cotton, rice, sugar, or milk, 
farmers in low-income countries find it difficult to compete. Farm subsidies in the high-income countries cause farmers 
in those countries to increase the amount they produce. This increase in supply drives down world prices of farm 
products below the costs of production. As Michael Gerson of the Washington Post describes it: “[T]he effects in the 
cotton-growing regions of West Africa are dramatic . . . keep[ing] millions of Africans on the edge of malnutrition. In 
some of the poorest countries on Earth, cotton farmers are some of the poorest people, earning about a dollar a day     
    Who benefits from the current
system of subsidies? About 20,000 American cotton producers, with an average annual income of more than $125,000.”
As if subsidies were not enough, often, the high-income countries block agricultural exports from low-income countries. 
In some cases, the situation gets even worse when the governments of high-income countries, having bought and paid for 
an excess supply of farm products, give away those products in poor countries and drive local farmers out of business 
alto- gether.
For example, shipments of excess milk from the European Union to Jamaica have caused great hardship for Jamaican dairy 
farmers. Shipments of excess rice from the United States to Haiti drove thousands of low-income rice farmers in Haiti 
out of business. The opportunity costs of protectionism are not paid just by domestic consumers, but also by foreign 
produc- ers—and for many agricultural products, those foreign producers are the world’s poor.

Now, let’s look at what happens with protectionism. U.S. sugar farmers are likely to argue that, if only they could be 
protected from sugar imported from Brazil, the United States would have higher domestic  sugar  production,  more  jobs 
 in  the  sugar  industry,  and  American  sugar  farmers  would receive a higher price. If the United States 
government sets a high-enough tariff on imported sugar, or sets an import quota at zero, the result will be that the 
quantity of sugar traded between countries could be reduced to zero, and the prices in each country will return to the 
levels before trade was allowed.

Blocking only some trade is also possible. Suppose that the United States passed a sugar import quota of seven tons. 
The United States will import no more than seven tons of sugar, which means that

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   759

Brazil can export no more than seven tons of sugar to the United States. As a result, the price of sugar in the United 
States will be 20 cents, which is the price where the quantity demanded is seven tons greater than the domestic 
quantity supplied. Conversely, if Brazil can export only seven tons of sugar, then the price of sugar in Brazil will be 
14 cents per pound, which is the price where the domestic quantity supplied in Brazil is seven tons greater than 
domestic demand.

In general, when a country sets a low or medium tariff or import quota, the equilibrium price and quantity will be 
somewhere between no trade and completely free trade. The following Work It Out explores the impact of these trade 
barriers.


EFFECTS OF TRADE BARRIERS

Let’s look carefully at the effects of tariffs or quotas. If the U.S. government imposes a tariff or quota sufficient 
to eliminate trade with Brazil, two things occur: U.S. consumers pay a higher price and therefore buy a smaller 
quantity of sugar. U.S. producers obtain a higher price so they sell a larger quantity of sugar. The effects of a 
tariff on producers and consumers in the United States can be measured using two concepts developed in Demand, Supply, 
and Efficiency: consumer surplus and producer surplus.


















Figure 3. U.S. Sugar Supply and Demand. When there is free trade, the equilibrium is at point A. When there is no 
trade, the equilibrium is at point E.

Step 1. Look at Figure 3, which shows a hypothetical version of the demand and supply of sugar in the United States.
Step 2. Note that the sugar market is in equilibrium at point A where Domestic Quantity Demanded (Qd) = Quantity Sup- 
plied (Domestic Qs + Imports from Brazil) at a price of PTrade when there is free trade.
Step 3. Note, also, that imports are equal to the distance between points C and A.
Step 4. Recall that consumer surplus is the value a consumer gets beyond what they paid for when they buy a product. 
Graphically, it is the area under a demand curve but above the price. In this case, the consumer surplus in the United 
States is the area of the triangle formed by the points PTrade, A, and B.
Step 5. Recall, also, that producer surplus is another name for profit—it is the income producers get above the cost of 
pro- duction, which is shown by the supply curve here. In this case, the producer surplus with trade is the area of the 
triangle formed by the points Ptrade, C, and D.

760                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 



Step 6. Suppose that the barriers to trade are imposed, imports are excluded, and the price rises to PNoTrade. Look 
what happens to producer surplus and consumer surplus. At the higher price, the domestic quantity supplied increases 
from Qs to Q at point E. Because producers are selling more quantity at a higher price, the producer surplus increases 
to the area of the triangle PNoTrade, E, and D.
Step 7. Compare the areas of the two triangles and you will see the increase in the producer surplus.
Step 8. Examine the consumer surplus. Consumers are now paying a higher price to get a lower quantity (Q instead of 
Qd). Their consumer surplus shrinks to the area of the triangle PNoTrade, E, and B.
Step 9. Determine the net effect. The producer surplus increases by the area Ptrade, C, E, PNoTrade. The loss of 
consumer surplus, however, is larger. It is the area Ptrade, A, E, PNoTrade. In other words, consumers lose more than 
producers gain as a result of the trade barriers and the United States has a lower social surplus.


WHO BENEFITS AND WHO PAYS?

Using the demand and supply model, consider the impact of protectionism on producers and con- sumers  in  each  of  the 
 two  countries.  For  protected  producers  like  U.S.  sugar  farmers,  restricting imports is clearly positive. 
Without a need to face imported products, these producers are able to sell more, at a higher price. For consumers in 
the country with the protected good, in this case U.S. sugar consumers, restricting imports is clearly negative. They 
end up buying a lower quantity of the good and paying a higher price for what they do buy, compared to the equilibrium 
price and quantity with- out trade. The following Clear It Up feature considers why a country might outsource jobs even 
for a domestic product.


WHY ARE LIFE SAVERS, AN AMERICAN PRODUCT, NOT MADE IN AMERICA?

Life Savers, the hard candy with the hole in the middle, were invented in 1912 by Clarence Crane in Cleveland, Ohio. 
Start- ing in the late 1960s and for 35 years afterward, 46 billion Life Savers a year, in 200 million rolls, were 
produced by a plant in Holland, Michigan. But in 2002, the Kraft Company announced that the Michigan plant would be 
closed and Life Saver production moved across the border to Montreal, Canada.
One reason is that Canadian workers are paid slightly less, especially in healthcare and insurance costs that are not 
linked to employment there. Another main reason is that the United States government keeps the price of sugar high for 
the benefit of sugar farmers, with a combination of a government price floor program and strict quotas on imported 
sugar. According to the Coalition for Sugar Reform, from 2009 to 2012, the price of refined sugar in the United States 
ranged from 64% to 92% higher than the world price. Life Saver production uses over 100 tons of sugar each day, because 
the candies are 95% sugar.
A number of other candy companies have also reduced U.S. production and expanded foreign production. Indeed, from 1997 
to 2011, some 127,000 jobs in the sugar-using industries, or more than seven times the total employment in sugar 
production, were eliminated. While the candy industry is especially affected by the cost of sugar, the costs are spread 
more broadly. U.S. consumers pay roughly $1 billion per year in higher food prices because of elevated sugar costs. 
Meanwhile, sugar producers in low-income countries are driven out of business. Because of the sugar subsidies to 
domestic producers and the quotas on imports, they cannot sell their output profitably, or at all, in the United States 
market.

The fact that protectionism pushes up prices for consumers in the country enacting such protection- ism is not always 
acknowledged openly, but it is not disputed. After all, if protectionism did not ben- efit domestic producers, there 
would not be much point in enacting such policies in the first place. Protectionism is simply a method of requiring 
consumers to subsidize producers. The subsidy is indi-

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   761

rect, since it is paid by consumers through higher prices, rather than a direct subsidy paid by the gov- ernment with 
money collected from taxpayers. But protectionism works like a subsidy, nonetheless. The American satirist Ambrose 
Bierce defined “tariff” this way in his 1911 book, The Devil’s Dictionary: “Tariff, n. A scale of taxes on imports, 
designed to protect the domestic producer against the greed of his consumer.”

The effect of protectionism on producers and consumers in the foreign country is complex. When an import quota is used 
to impose partial protectionism, the sugar producers of Brazil receive a lower price for the sugar they sell in 
Brazil—but a higher price for the sugar they are allowed to export to the United States. Indeed, notice that some of 
the burden of protectionism, paid by domestic consumers, ends up in the hands of foreign producers in this case. 
Brazilian sugar consumers seem to benefit from
U.S. protectionism, because it reduces the price of sugar that they pay. On the other hand, at least some of these 
Brazilian sugar consumers also work as sugar farmers, so their incomes and jobs are reduced by protectionism. Moreover, 
if trade between the countries vanishes, Brazilian consumers would miss out on better prices for imported goods—which 
do not appear in our single-market exam- ple of sugar protectionism.

The effects of protectionism on foreign countries notwithstanding, protectionism requires domestic consumers  of  a  
product  (consumers  may  include  either  households  or  other  firms)  to  pay  higher prices to benefit domestic 
producers of that product. In addition, when a country enacts protection- ism, it loses the economic gains it would 
have been able to achieve through a combination of com- parative advantage, specialized learning, and economies of 
scale, concepts discussed in International Trade.

KEY CONCEPTS AND SUMMARY

There are three tools for restricting the flow of trade: tariffs, import quotas, and nontariff barriers. When a country 
places limitations on imports from abroad, regardless of whether it uses tariffs, quo- tas, or nontariff barriers, it 
is said to be practicing protectionism. Protectionism will raise the price of the protected good in the domestic 
market, which causes domestic consumers to pay more, but domestic producers to earn more.

SELF-CHECK QUESTIONS



1.    Explain how a tariff reduction causes an increase in the equilibrium quantity of imports and a decrease in the 
equilibrium price. Hint: Consider the Work It Out “Effects of Trade Barriers.”
2.    Explain how a subsidy on agricultural goods like sugar adversely affects the income of foreign producers of 
imported sugar.



REVIEW QUESTIONS



1.    Who does protectionism protect? What does it protect them from?
2.    Name and define three policy tools for enacting protectionism.
3.    How does protectionism affect the price of the protected good in the domestic market?

762                   ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 



CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS



1.    Show graphically that for any tariff, there is an equivalent quota that would give the same result. What would be 
the difference, then, between the two types of trade barriers? Hint: It is not something you can see from the graph.
2.    From the Work It Out “Effects of Trade Barriers,” you can see that a tariff raises the price of imports. What is 
interesting is that the price rises by less than the amount of the tariff. Who pays the rest of the tariff amount? Can 
you show this graphically?



PROBLEMS



Assume two countries, Thailand (T) and Japan ( J), have one good: cameras. The demand (d) and supply (s) for cameras in 
Thailand and Japan is described by the following functions:








P is the price measured in a common currency used in both countries, such as the Thai Baht.

a.    Compute the equilibrium price (P) and quantities (Q) in each country without trade.
b.    Now assume that free trade occurs. The free-trade price goes to 56.36 Baht. Who exports and imports cameras and 
in what quantities?



REFERENCES

Bureau of Labor Statistics. “Industries at a Glance.” Accessed December 31, 2013. http://www.bls.gov/ iag/.

Oxfam International. Accessed January 6, 2014. http://www.oxfam.org/.

GLOSSARY
import quotas numerical limits on the quantity of products that can be imported
nontariff barriers ways a nation can draw up rules, regulations, inspections, and paperwork to make it more costly or 
difficult to import products
protectionism government policies to reduce or block imports
World Trade Organization (WTO) organization that seeks to negotiate reductions in barriers to trade and to adjudicate 
complaints about violations of international trade policy; successor to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 
(GATT)

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                                   763
SOLUTIONS


Answers to Self-Cfteck Questions

1.    This is the opposite case of the Work It Out feature. A reduced tariff is like a decrease in the cost of 
production, which is shown by a downward (or rightward) shift in the supply curve.
2.    A subsidy is like a reduction in cost. This shifts the supply curve down (or to the right), driving the price of 
sugar down. If the subsidy is large enough, the price of sugar can fall below the cost of production faced by foreign 
producers, which means they will lose money on any sugar they produce and sell.
