


PREFACE


Principles of Economics is designed for a two-semester principles of economics sequence. It is traditional in coverage, 
including introductory economics content, microeconomics, macroeconomics and international economics. At the same time, 
the book includes a number of innovative and interactive features designed to enhance student learning. Instructors can 
also customize the book, adapting it to the approach that works best in their classroom.

Welcome to Principles of Economics, an OpenStax resource. This textbook has been created with several goals in mind: 
accessibility, customization, and student engagement—all while encouraging students toward high levels of academic 
scholarship. Instructors and students alike will find that this textbook offers a strong foundation in economics in an 
accessible format.

ABOUT OPENSTAX

OpenStax  is  a  non-profit  organization  committed  to  improving  student  access  to  quality  learning materials. 
Our free textbooks go through a rigorous editorial publishing process. Our texts are devel- oped and peer-reviewed by 
educators to ensure they are readable, accurate, and meet the scope and sequence requirements of today’s college 
courses. Unlike traditional textbooks, OpenStax resources live  online  and  are  owned  by  the  community  of  
educators  using  them.  Through  our  partnerships with companies and foundations committed to reducing costs for 
students, OpenStax is working to improve access to higher education for all. OpenStax is an initiative of Rice 
University and is made possible through the generous support of several philanthropic foundations.

ABOUT OPENSTAX’S RESOURCES

OpenStax resources provide quality academic instruction. Three key features set our materials apart from others: they 
can be customized by instructors for each class, they are a “living” resource that grows online through contributions 
from science educators, and they are available free or for minimal cost.

CUSTOMIZATION

OpenStax learning resources are designed to be customized for each course. Our textbooks provide a solid foundation on 
which instructors can build, and our resources are conceived and written with flexibility in mind. Instructors can 
select the sections most relevant to their curricula and create a textbook that speaks directly to the needs of their 
classes and student body. Teachers are encouraged to expand on existing examples by adding unique context via 
geographically localized applications and topical connections.
Principles of Economics can be easily customized using our online platform (http://cnx.org/content/ col11613/). Simply 
select the content most relevant to your current semester and create a textbook

xxii                      ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 

that speaks directly to the needs of your class. Principles of Economics is organized as a collection of sections that 
can be rearranged, modified, and enhanced through localized examples or to incorpo- rate a specific theme of your 
course. This customization feature will ensure that your textbook truly reflects the goals of your course. Principles 
of Economics is also available in two volumes, one covering microeconomics and one covering macroeconomics principles.

CURATION
To  broaden  access  and  encourage  community  curation,  Principles  of  Economics  is  “open  source” licensed  
under  a  Creative  Commons  Attribution  (CC-BY)  license.  The  economics  community  is invited to submit examples, 
emerging research, and other feedback to enhance and strengthen the material and keep it current and relevant for 
today’s students. You can submit your suggestions to info@openstaxcollege.org.

COST

Our textbooks are available for free online, and in low-cost print and e-book editions.

ABOUT PRINCIPLES OF ECONOMICS
Principles of Economics is designed for a two-semester principles of economics sequence. The text has been developed to 
meet the scope and sequence of most introductory courses. At the same time, the book includes a number of innovative 
features designed to enhance student learning. Instructors can also customize the book, adapting it to the approach 
that works best in their classroom.

COVERAGE AND SCOPE
To develop Principles of Economics, we acquired the rights to Timothy Taylor’s second edition of Prin- ciples of 
Economics and solicited ideas from economics instructors at all levels of higher education, from community colleges to 
Ph.D.-granting universities. They told us about their courses, students, challenges, resources, and how a textbook can 
best meet the needs of both instructors and students.

The result is a book that covers the breadth of economics topics and also provides the necessary depth to ensure the 
course is manageable for instructors and students alike. And to make it more applied, we have incorporated many current 
topics. We hope students will be interested to know just how far- reaching the recent recession was (and still is), for 
example, and why there is so much controversy even among economists over the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare). The 
Keystone Pipeline, Occupy Wall Street, minimum wage debates, and the appointment of the United States’ first female 
Federal Reserve chair, Janet Yellen, are just a few of the other important topics covered.

The  pedagogical  choices,  chapter  arrangements,  and  learning  objective  fulfillment  were  developed and vetted 
with feedback from educators dedicated to the project. They thoroughly read the material and  offered  critical  and  
detailed  commentary.  The  outcome  is  a  balanced  approach  to  micro  and macro economics, to both Keynesian and 
classical views, and to the theory and application of eco- nomics concepts. New 2015 data are incorporated for topics 
that range from average U.S. household consumption in Chapter 2 to the total value of all home equity in Chapter 17. 
Current events are treated in a politically-balanced way as well.

The book is organized into eight main parts:

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                         xxiii

•   Wftat is Economics? The first two chapters introduce students to the study of economics with a focus on making 
choices in a world of scarce resources.
•   Supply and Demand, Chapters 3 and 4, introduces and explains the first analytical model in economics: supply, 
demand, and equilibrium, before showing applications in the markets for labor and finance.
•   Tfte Fundamentals of Microeconomic Tfteory, Chapters 5 through 10, begins the microeconomics portion of the text, 
presenting the theories of consumer behavior, production and costs, and the different models of market structure, 
including some simple game theory.
•   Microeconomic Policy Issues, Chapters 11 through 18, cover the range of topics in applied micro, framed around the 
concepts of public goods and positive and negative externalities. Students explore competition and antitrust policies, 
environmental problems, poverty, income inequality, and other labor market issues. The text also covers information, 
risk and financial markets, as well as public economy.
•   Tfte Macroeconomic Perspective and Goals, Chapters 19 through 23, introduces a number of key concepts in macro: 
economic growth, unemployment and inflation, and international trade and capital flows.
•   A Framework for Macroeconomic Analysis, Chapters 24 through 26, introduces the principal analytic model in macro, 
namely the Aggregate Demand/Aggregate Supply Model. The model is then applied to the Keynesian and Neoclassical 
perspectives. The Expenditure- Output model is fully explained in a stand-alone appendix.
•   Monetary and Fiscal Policy, Chapters 27 through 31, explains the role of money and the banking system, as well as 
monetary policy and financial regulation. Then the discussion switches to government deficits and fiscal policy.
•   International Economics, Chapters 32 through 34, the final part of the text, introduces the international 
dimensions of economics, including international trade and protectionism.

Chapter 1 Welcome to Economics! Chapter 2 Choice in a World of Scarcity Chapter 3 Demand and Supply
Chapter 4 Labor and Financial Markets Chapter 5 Elasticity
Chapter 6 Consumer Choices

Chapter 7 Cost and Industry Structure Chapter 8 Perfect Competition Chapter 9 Monopoly
Chapter 10 Monopolistic Competition and Oligopoly

xxiv                     ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


Chapter 11 Monopoly and Antitrust Policy

Chapter 12 Environmental Protection and Negative Externalities Chapter 13 Positive Externalities and Public Goods
Chapter 14 Poverty and Economic Inequality

Chapter 15 Issues in Labor Markets: Unions, Discrimination, Immigration Chapter 16 Information, Risk, and Insurance
Chapter 17 Financial Markets Chapter 18 Public Economy
Chapter 19 The Macroeconomic Perspective Chapter 20 Economic Growth
Chapter 21 Unemployment

Chapter 22 Inflation

Chapter 23 The International Trade and Capital Flows Chapter 24 The Aggregate Demand/Aggregate Supply Model Chapter 25 
The Keynesian Perspective
Chapter 26 The Neoclassical Perspective Chapter 27 Money and Banking
Chapter 28 Monetary Policy and Bank Regulation

Chapter 29 Exchange Rates and International Capital Flows Chapter 30 Government Budgets and Fiscal Policy
Chapter 31 The Impacts of Government Borrowing Chapter 32 Macroeconomic Policy Around the World Chapter 33 
International Trade
Chapter 34 Globalization and Protectionism

Appendix A The Use of Mathematics in Principles of Economics

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                          xxv

Appendix B Indifference Curves Appendix C Present Discounted Value
Appendix D The Expenditure-Output Model

Alternate Sequencing
Principles of Economics was conceived and written to fit a particular topical sequence, but it can be used flexibly to 
accommodate other course structures. One such potential structure, which will fit reason- ably well with the textbook 
content, is provided. Please consider, however, that the chapters were not written to be completely independent, and 
that the proposed alternate sequence should be carefully considered for student preparation and textual consistency.

Chapter 1 Welcome to Economics! Chapter 2 Choice in a World of Scarcity Chapter 3 Demand and Supply
Chapter 4 Labor and Financial Markets Chapter 5 Elasticity
Chapter 6 Consumer Choices Chapter 33 International Trade
Chapter 7 Cost and Industry Structure

Chapter 12 Environmental Protection and Negative Externalities Chapter 13 Positive Externalities and Public Goods
Chapter 8 Perfect Competition Chapter 9 Monopoly
Chapter 10 Monopolistic Competition and Oligopoly Chapter 11 Monopoly and Antitrust Policy
Chapter 14 Poverty and Economic Inequality

Chapter 15 Issues in Labor Markets: Unions, Discrimination, Immigration Chapter 16 Information, Risk, and Insurance
Chapter 17 Financial Markets Chapter 18 Public Economy

xxvi                     ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


Chapter 19 The Macroeconomic Perspective Chapter 20 Economic Growth
Chapter 21 Unemployment

Chapter 22 Inflation

Chapter 23 The International Trade and Capital Flows Chapter 24 The Aggregate Demand/Aggregate Supply Model Chapter 25 
The Keynesian Perspective
Chapter 26 The Neoclassical Perspective Chapter 27 Money and Banking
Chapter 28 Monetary Policy and Bank Regulation

Chapter 29 Exchange Rates and International Capital Flows Chapter 30 Government Budgets and Fiscal Policy
Chapter 31 The Impacts of Government Borrowing Chapter 32 Macroeconomic Policy Around the World Chapter 34 
Globalization and Protectionism
Appendix A The Use of Mathematics in Principles of Economics Appendix B Indifference Curves
Appendix C Present Discounted Value Appendix D The Expenditure-Output Model
PEDAGOGICAL FOUNDATION
Throughout the OpenStax version of Principles of Economics, you will find new features that engage the students in 
economic inquiry by taking selected topics a step further. Our features include:

•   Bring It Home: This added feature is a brief case study, specific to each chapter, which connects the chapter’s 
main topic to the real word. It is broken up into two parts: the first at the beginning of the chapter (in the Intro 
module) and the second at chapter’s end, when students have learned what’s necessary to understand the case and “bring 
home” the chapter’s core concepts.
•   Work It Out: This added feature asks students to work through a generally analytical or computational problem, and 
guides them step-by-step to find out how its solution is derived.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                        xxvii

•   Clear It Up: This boxed feature, which includes pre-existing features from Taylor’s text, addresses common student 
misconceptions about the content. Clear It Ups are usually deeper explanations of something in the main body of the 
text. Each CIU starts with a question. The rest of the feature explains the answer.
•   Link It Up: This added feature is a very brief introduction to a website that is pertinent to students’ 
understanding and enjoyment of the topic at hand.

QUESTIONS FOR EACH LEVEL OF LEARNING
The OpenStax version of Principles of Economics further expands on Taylor’s original end of chapter materials by 
offering four types of end-of-module questions for students.

•   Self-Cftecks: Are analytical self-assessment questions that appear at the end of each module. They 
“click–to-reveal” an answer in the web view so students can check their understanding before moving on to the next 
module. Self-Check questions are not simple look-up questions. They push the student to think a bit beyond what is said 
in the text. Self-Check questions are designed for formative (rather than summative) assessment. The questions and 
answers are explained so that students feel like they are being walked through the problem.
•   Review Questions: Have been retained from Taylor’s version, and are simple recall questions from the chapter and 
are in open-response format (not multiple choice or true/ false). The answers can be looked up in the text.
•   Critical Tftinking Questions: Are new higher-level, conceptual questions that ask students to demonstrate their 
understanding by applying what they have learned in different contexts. They ask for outside-the-box thinking, for 
reasoning about the concepts. They push the student to places they wouldn’t have thought of going themselves.
•   Problems: Are exercises that give students additional practice working with the analytic and computational concepts 
in the module.

UPDATED ART
Principles of Economics includes an updated art program to better inform today’s student, providing the latest data on 
covered topics.

ABOUT OUR TEAM

SENIOR CONTRIBUTING AUTHOR
Timotfty Taylor, Macalester College

Timothy Taylor has been writing and teaching about economics for 30 years, and is the Managing Editor of the Journal of 
Economic Perspectives, a post he’s held since 1986. He has been a lecturer for The Teaching Company, the University of 
Minnesota, and the Hubert H. Humphrey Institute of Pub- lic Affairs,  where students  voted him Teacher of the Year in 
1997. His writings include numerous pieces for journals such as the Milken Institute Review and The Public Interest, 
and he has been an edi- tor  on  many  projects,  most  notably  for  the  Brookings  Institution  and  the  World  
Bank,  where  he was Chief Outside Editor for the World Development Report 1999/2000, Entering the 21st Century: The 
Changing Development Landscape. He also blogs four to five times per week at http://conversableecon-

xxviii                  ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 

































Figure 1. U.S. Minimum Wage and Inflation. After adjusting for inflation, the federal minimum wage dropped more than 30 
percent from 1967 to 2010, even though the nominal figure climbed from $1.40 to $7.25 per hour. Increases in the 
minimum wage in 2007, 2008, and 2009 kept the decline from being worse—as it would have been if the wage had remained 
the same as it did from 1997 through 2006. (Sources: http://www.dol.gov/whd/ minwage/chart.htm; 
http://data.bls.gov/cgi-bin/surveymost?cu)

omist.blogspot.com. Timothy Taylor lives near Minneapolis with his wife Kimberley and their three children.

Steven A. Greenlaw, University of Mary Wasftington

Steven  Greenlaw  has  been  teaching  principles  of  economics  for  more  than  30  years.  In  1999,  he received 
the Grellet C. Simpson Award for Excellence in Undergraduate Teaching at the University of Mary Washington. He is the 
author of Doing Economics: A Guide to Doing and Understanding Economic Research, as well as a variety of articles on 
economics pedagogy and instructional technology, pub- lished in the Journal of Economic Education, the International 
Review of Economic Education, and other outlets. He wrote the module on Quantitative Writing for Starting Point: 
Teaching and Learning Eco- nomics, the web portal on best practices in teaching economics. Steven Greenlaw lives in 
Alexandria, Virginia with his wife Kathy and their three children.

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                         xxix


CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS

Eric Dodge                Hanover College
Cynthia Gamez        University of Texas at El Paso Andres Jauregui       Columbus State University Diane Keenan        
   Cerritos College
Dan MacDonald      California State University San Bernardino Amyaz Moledina     The College of Wooster
Craig Richardson    Winston-Salem State University David Shapiro          Pennsylvania State University Ralph 
Sonenshine    American University

xxx                      ERIK  DEAN, JUSTIN  ELARDO, MITCH  GREEN, BENJAMIN  WILSON, SEBASTIAN  BERGER 


EXPERT REVIEWERS

Bryan Aguiar                      Northwest Arkansas Community College Basil Al Hashimi               Mesa Community 
College
Emil Berendt                     Mount St. Mary’s University
Zena Buser                         Adams State University Douglas Campbell            The University of Memphis
Sanjukta Chaudhuri         University of Wisconsin – Eau Claire Xueyu Cheng                     Alabama State 
University
Robert Cunningham        Alma College  Rosa Lea Danielson          College of DuPage Steven Deloach                  
Elon University
Debbie Evercloud             University of Colorado Denver
Sal Figueras                        Hudson County Community College Reza Ghorashi                   Richard Stockton 
College of New Jersey Robert Gillette                   University of Kentucky
Shaomin Huang                Lewis-Clark State College
George Jones                      University of Wisconsin-Rock County Charles Kroncke               College of Mount 
St. Joseph
Teresa Laughlin                 Palomar Community College
Carlos Liard-Muriente    Central Connecticut State University Heather Luea                     Kansas State University
Steven Lugauer                 University of Notre Dame William Mosher                Nashua Community College
Michael Netta                    Hudson County Community College Nick Noble                         Miami University
Joe Nowakowski               Muskingum University
Shawn Osell                       University of Wisconsin, Superior Mark Owens                      Middle Tennessee 
State University Sonia Pereira                      Barnard College
Brian Peterson                   Central College
Jennifer Platania               Elon University
Robert Rycroft                   University of Mary Washington Adrienne Sachse               Florida State College at 
Jacksonville Hans Schumann                Texas AM
Gina Shamshak                 Goucher College
Chris Warburton              John Jay College of Criminal Justice, CUNY Mark Witte                         Northwestern
Chiou-nan Yeh                  Alabama State University

PRINCIPLES  OF  ECONOMICS                                                                         xxxi

ANCILLARIES

OpenStax projects offer an array of ancillaries for students and instructors. Please visit http://open- staxcollege.org 
and view the learning resources for this title.

COPYRIGHT

©  May  18,  2016  OpenStax  Economics.  Textbook  content  produced  by  OpenStax  Economics  is licensed under a 
Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 license.Under this license, any user of this textbook or the textbook contents 
herein must provide proper attribution as follows:Tfte Open- Stax College name, OpenStax College logo, OpenStax College 
book covers, OpenStax CNX name, and OpenStax CNX logo are not subject to tfte creative commons license and may not be 
repro- duced witftout tfte prior and express written consent of Rice University. For questions regarding this license, 
please contact partners@openstaxcollege.org.If you use this textbook as a bibliographic reference, then you should cite 
it as follows:OpenStax Economics, Principles of Economics. OpenStax CNX.  May  18,  2016  
http://cnx.org/contents/69619d2b-68f0-44b0-b074-a9b2bf90b2c6@11.330.If you redistribute this textbook in a print 
format, then you must include on every physical page the fol- lowing attribution:
“Download                         for                         free                         at                         
http://cnx.org/contents/ 69619d2b-68f0-44b0-b074-a9b2bf90b2c6@11.330.”If you redistribute part of this textbook, then 
you must retain in every digital format page view (including but not limited to EPUB, PDF, and HTML) and on every 
physical printed page the following attribution:
“Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/69619d2b-68f0-44b0-b074-a9b2bf90b2c6@11.330.”

Book Name:
Principles of Economics

Author:
OpenStax

Keywords/Tags:
Economics, Microeconomics, Macroeconomics, Introductory Copyright:2016 by Rice University.


Principles of Economics by Rice University is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
except where otherwise noted.

This textbook is available for free at open.bccampus.ca


